Cover
@page {padding: 0pt; margin:0pt}
body { text-align: center; padding:0pt; margin: 0pt; }
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On the Heights of Despair
E. M. Cioran
Translated and with an Introduction by Ilinca Zarifopol-Johnston
Chicago & London
The University of Chicago
Press
1990
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Acknowledgments
I
thank E. M. Cioran for entrusting me with this book, Matei Calinescu for bringing us
together, Mme. Simone Boue and Jennie Lightner for their very helpful editorial suggestions, my
cousin, Pedro Pidal Nano, for the peace of his house
by the sea where most of this translation was completed, and last but not
least, my husband, Kenneth R. Johnston, whose fine sense of the English
language shines forth through the book and helped bring it to life a second time.
This
translation was made possible by grants from Indiana University (Office of
Research & Graduate Development and Russian & East European Institute)
and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.
Ilinca Zarifopol-Johnston
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Introduction: Imagining Cioran
Imagining the author is part of
any reading experience. For the translator, even more than for the ordinary
reader, the author, or that fiction named Author, is a personal obsession. Like
Jacob who wrestled a mysterious being all night long, the translator struggles
silently with the author until he blesses him or lets him go. Like Jacob, he
wants to know his opponent, to see him face to face, is haunted physically and
spiritually by the author's face, his name, his strength, his style. So I
struggled with Cioran, and for a long time I imagined
him like a spirit conjured up from the lines of his text as from a witch's
brew: a leonine head, Zarathustra's voice, dramatic poses alternating between
those of a biblical prophet and a Western dandy. Above all, I saw him as
frightfully young and precocious, with an uncanny affinity for suffering and a
diabolical propensity for self-torture, an enfant terrible full of somber and
cruel vitality, dangerously playing at philosophy, toying with poisonous and
lethal thoughts.
But my Cioran
has a historical dimension still recoverable from a not-too-distant past. He is
a young intellectual from Romania's politically troubled interwar period.
Along with Eugene lonesco, the absurdist playwright
and member of the Academic franfaise, and Mircea Eliade, the philosopher
and historian of religions, he participated in Romania's cultural Renaissance
during the 1930s. He belonged to Romania's "Young Generation," her
"angry young men," who, in Matei Calinescu's words, represented
"a generation whose creed was based on the primacy of youth over old
age—youth being equated with spiritual fervor, authenticity, creativity,
idealism, while old age symbolized routine, inertia, political corruption and
petty materialism." As Calinescu points out,
1934, the year when On the Heights of Despair was
first published, was one of the high points of the 1930s in Romania. Eliade published five books, among them a study in
religious anthropology which contains the main ideas of The Forge and the Crucible (1962), and lonesco published his only major Romanian book, a volume
of deconstructive literary criticism titled No.
Though younger than either Eliade or lonesco, Cioran was no less interesting. His intense personality
invited fictionalizing early in his life. Calinescu,
for example, recognizes an early portrait of the young Cioran
in the character of §tefan Parlea
(the name suggests conflagration) from Mihail
Sebastian's 1934novel, For Two Thousand Years, where
he is the author of an essay provocatively titled, "Invocation for an
Invasion of the Barbarians as Soon as Possible." He embodies "the nihilistic-apocalyptic
sensibilities of the young generation of Romanian intellectuals."
It was hard for me to reconcile
my fictional Cioran with his historical origins. The
voice which in On the Heights of Despair vehemently
denounces Christianity, and the man who wrote the startling essay "The
Flight from the Cross," clash with the image of the real-life Cioran, son of a Romanian Orthodox priest. He was born in
the Transylvanian mountain village of Ra§inari, famous
in Romania not only for its natural beauty but also as the home and the final
resting place of other cultural figures of national renown, the poet Octavian Goga and the enlightened Orthodox bishop-scholar of
Transylvania, Andrei §aguna. As a young teenager, I
once passed through Cioran's village. The idyllic
village, with its stone-paved, uneven streets and ancient peasant houses, was
like a place out of time, an enchanted, mythical site. A mysterious richness
hung about it, entrancing, heavy, and luminous like the golden glow of the
silent summer afternoon I spent in its gardens and orchards. And I know now
that on my way to the cemetery to visit Bishop §aguna's
tomb I passed Cioran's family house. It was my first
unwitting encounter with him, who has been for the last few years my private obsessive
fiction, and to whom, in my linguistic struggle, I have clung like Jacob to
his angel.
I am no Jacob, and Cioran is no angel, except perhaps a sly one of the devil's
party. But for as long as I have known of his existence, he
has been hard to grab hold of and impossible to pin down. When I was a
student in Romania in the 1960s and 1970s, he was a mysterious, almost
mythological, presence. One would hear that such a person existed, but it was
impossible to read him. His French books were neither sold nor published in
translation, and his Romanian books had disappeared without a trace, the rarest
of rare books. Although he had departed his homeland some ten years before the
war and the Communist takeover, he was as invisible as the most unspeakable, or
unnameable, of nonpersons. When I came to America in
the late 1970s, I found that he was well known in elite intellectual circles,
though he remained as elusive and mysterious as ever. His Romanian books are
still literally rare, available only from special collections. The present book
is the first translation of Cioran from his native
language into English. At last, I have got hold of him,
and for at least the space of one translation—that most provisional of arts—I
have pinned him down for others to see and read. Granted, he is a specialized
taste, too sharp and bitter for many palates and, paradoxically, too lyrical
and funny for some others. Yet Sartre has always had a large following in
English, and Cioran is in my estimation a better
pure writer than Sartre or any of the postwar French existentialists. His
stylistic incisiveness has led some French critics to put him in the same class
as Paul Valery, an ultimate accolade of linguistic purity. But the shocking,
bracing verve of his existential despair—and good humor—admits his
philosophical prose to the company of Nietzsche and Kierkegaard.
As I tried to imagine my Cioran, I kept replaying in my mind that day of long ago
when I first brushed by his invisible presence, and I wondered how I could
relate my "nihilistic-apocalyptic" Cioran
to the details I still remembered so well: the mountain air shimmering with
hues of gold and green and blue, the still, heavy, yet happy torpor of a
slumbering summer day in a remote village where the only sign of activity was
the buzz of lazy drones on leaves of grass. And was it my Cioran
that I had almost touched, or just a ghost he had long left behind, whose name
was only secretively whispered in Romania for the past twenty-five years?
Instead of an answer to my puzzlement, I found in Cioran's
own writing a confirmation of the irredeemable incompatibility I sensed
between the place and the man. In The Temptation to
Exist (1956), he writes about his origins:
The paradox of being . . . [a Romanian]
is a torrent one must know how to exploit. . . . Hating my people, my country,
its timeless peasants enamoured of their own torpor
and almost bursting with hebetude, I blushed to be descended from them. . . .
Unable to shove them aside, or to animate them, I came to the point of dreaming
of an extermination.
In
a lighter vein, when I first visited him last summer, he also recalled, as a
confirmation of this incompatibility between himself and his origins, a
humorous family anecdote concerning the scandal stirred up in his remote native
region by his first nihilistic book, On the Heights of
Despair. His father, a priest, and his mother, head of the
Christian Women's League, kept a very low profile, and weathered the storm by
hiding in the house with the lights off and going to bed very early for weeks
on end.
A
reader of Cioran's entire oeuvre easily gets caught
up in the game of making and unmaking authorial fictions, for the real-life Cioran has two lives, two identities, two authorial voices.
In 1937 he won a student fellowship and left Romania for Paris, never to
return. He wrote only in French thereafter. As I have already said, Cioran is little known in Romania outside intellectual
circles, which have kept his name alive underground. While his fame grew
steadily in the West from the moment his first French book, Precis de decomposition,
was published in 1949, a quarter- century of Romania's Communist cultural
policies managed to erase all the traces he had left behind in his native
country, where he published several works. The recent Romanian revolution has
allowed a Cioran revival, toward which Cioran himself has mixed feelings. Modest and unassuming,
though winner of the Prix Combat and acclaimed as "the greatest French
writer to honor our language since the death of Paul Valery" (St. John Perse) and "the most distinguished figure in the
tradition of Kierkegaard, Nietzsche and Wittgenstein" (Susan Sontag), Cioran has always shunned fame. He regards it as an
ambiguous blessing and prefers anonymity as a guarantor of freedom, even when
the freedom he seems to aspire to most is that of walking undisturbed in the
Luxembourg gardens.
The Romanian Cioran of the 1930s is different from but related to the
French—and much better known—Cioran of the later
decades. By reading the younger Romanian Cioran, we
discover, as another of his translators put it, "what he has kept and
what he has discarded, the old man of his youth and the new man he became after
his encounter with the French language." The themes of Cioran's
work are the themes of modern and postmodern Western civilization: despair and
decay, absurdity and alienation, futility and the irrationality of existence,
the need for total lucidity and self-awareness, and consciousness as agony. On the Heights of Despair, Cioran's
first published work, foreshadows the main themes of his later philosophical
essays and is highly significant as the original source-spring of this modern
philosophical writer's thought.
The French Cioran
is a Nietzsche distilled through Chamfort, a
"Job tamed at the school of the moralists," an elegant and ironic
stylist who has curbed the fiery lyricism of his youth with moral aphorisms,
because he knows that "a moralist's first duty is to depoetize
his prose" (Le mauvais demiurge,
135). My Cioran, by contrast, at the time he was
writing On the Heights of Despair in 1934, is
only twenty-two years old, a Nietzsche still complete with his
"Zarathustra, his poses, his mystical clown's tricks, a whole circus of
the heights" (Syllogismes de I'amertume, 44). His display of hysteria, his
confession of failure, his despair and lucid suffering also echo Dostoyevsky's
man from underground, revealing Cioran as a young
iconoclast from Europe's eastern margins, spitefully spouting fire and
brimstone from his Balkan hole-in-the-ground, a visionary of apocalypse, a
"lover of paroxysms," a theoretician of despair, an untamed Job,
similar to the one he portrayed in his last Romanian book, Tears and Saints: "Job, [is] cosmic lamentations and
weeping willows . . . open wounds of nature and of the soul . . . and a human
heart, God's open wound."
The existence of a real-life
author complicates the game of authorial fiction-making. As I fashioned my Cioran, I longed to meet the real-life Cioran
because, like Jacob, I wanted his blessing but also because I felt that he
would not be complete until I met him in flesh and blood. I knew that the
real-life eighty-year- old Cioran would be very
different from my youthful authorial fiction, but I looked forward to the clash
of images as something essential and fulfilling, in line with all the
contradictions impishly cultivated in Cioran's work.
Whenever I imagined my Cioran, I hoped that the
real-life Cioran, though close to eighty, would be a
young old man. I was not disappointed.
In his modest Paris apartment,
imaginatively improvised out of the attic of an old building on the Left Bank,
where until recently there was no elevator, he emerged from an enormous clutter
of towering books, and led me through a narrow passage with a low ceiling and
an uneven floor to an unexpectedly sunny room with a cheerful garden suspended
from its terrace. Cioran looked frail, but
misleadingly so, as I discovered when he told me that he preferred to ignore
the new elevators in his building, or when, stepping out briskly, he took me on
his favorite walk through the Luxembourg gardens. When he talked, his clear
green eyes flashed from under thick eyebrows, their penetrating glare
transfixing me to the chair, while his jaw pushed forward with youthful
determination, and the old man was miraculously transformed into the young man
I knew, my Cioran. But the fascinating contradiction
remained, for the young man spoke like an old man, and when I asked what he was
writing, he answered that he no longer wrote, because "I don't want to
slander the universe anymore; I've done it long enough, don't you think
so?" Yes, this seemed to be the "new" Cioran,
professing that he is through with writing and that he has exhausted calumny,
so different from my young Cioran whose first book
was brimming over with blasphemy. And yet, hearing him talk, humorously and
vivaciously—another contradiction coming from a "writer of gloomy
aphorisms"—I could not help feeling that I may not have been dealing with
the real-life Cioran as much as with another
fiction, a new persona, and that he will soon take us by surprise yet another
time, for he is a master of dramatic effects who has been described as both
"candid and diabolical" by the Italian writer Pietro
Citati and as "the last dandy" by the
Spanish philosopher Fernando Savater.
If fictionalizing the author is
part of any reading experience, an exercise of the imagination which varies in
degrees of importance depending on the book, it becomes a central issue in
reading On the Heights of Despair, where the
author deliberately invents a fictional self through rhetorical artifices and
theatrical gestures, in order to save his real self. Written in a moment of crisis,
when he was helplessly and desperately insomniac, the book is a substitute for
suicide and represents its cure. Its title makes a direct allusion to suicide
notices placed in contemporary Romanian newspapers of the period which
invariably opened with the same formula: "On the heights of despair, young
so-and-so took his life. . . ."A rather pompous sounding phrase, "on
the heights of despair" thus came to be recognized as a sort of generic
rationale for all suicides. Using the cliche
ironically, Cioran casts himself in the role of what
I would call "the young barbarian" or the "beast" of the
Apocalypse, who, with a blood- and tear-stained face, uttering a savage cry of
revolt and despair from the heart of his semi-Oriental Balkans, hangs over the
abyss of existential nausea. By casting himself in this character, Cioran commits suicide metaphorically while managing to
survive the call of death by releasing through his invented character the
surplus of lyrical energy surging in him: "The terrifying experience and
obsession of death, when preserved in consciousness, becomes ruinous. If you
talk about death, you save part of yourself. But at the same time, something of
your real self dies, because objectified meanings
lose the actuality they have in consciousness."
The impulse to write in order
to free himself of his obsessions has always motivated Cioran's
work. As he put it in a recent interview with Savater,
"Writing is for me a form of therapy, nothing more." Like the young
Goethe of the Sturm und Drang
period, who invented the suicidal Werther in order to
survive a personal crisis, Cioran also creates a
character out of his anguished self. But unlike Goethe, for whom Werther was a private demon he managed to exorcise "so
well that he did not suffer at all," a mere accident in a career so "limpid,"
and devoid of "sublime or sordid secrets" that it is
"discouraging," Cioran, who confesses he
has "no organ of feeling for Goethe" (Syllogismes de I'amertume,
22), sees his destiny as inextricably linked to the sufferer who first comes to
life in On the Heights of Despair:
I hate wise
men because they are lazy, cowardly and prudent. . . . So much more complex is
the man who suffers from limitless anxiety. The wise man's life is empty and sterile,
for it is free from contradiction and despair. An existence full of
irreconcilable contradictions is so much richer and creative.
On the Heights of Despair is a Romantic crisis poem in
prose whose main topic is the self at grips with itself, God, and the universe.
The self's personal obsessions, predilections, and manias become clear from a
glance at some of the chapter titles: "The Passion for the Absurd,"
"The Blessings of Insomnia," "Weariness and Agony,"
"The Premonition of Madness," "On Death," "On
Sadness," "Nothing Is Important," "Total
Dissatisfaction," "The Monopoly of Suffering," "Not to Be a
Man Anymore," "Man, the Insomniac Animal," "Degradation
through Work," "The Flight from the Cross," "Absolute
Lyricism," "Nonsense."
Though
not poetry, On the Heights of Despair is a very
lyrical work, a "song of myself" in which the confessional mood becomes
a philosophical meditation and where the great philosophical topics like
death, God, infinity, time, eternity, history, truth, good, and evil are no
longer abstract but acquire an organic reality, a living meaning:
There are
experiences and obsessions with which one cannot live. Isn't it then salvation
to confess them? . . .To be lyrical means you cannot
stay closed up inside yourself. The need to externalize is the more intense,
the more the lyricism is interiorized, profound, and concentrated. . . . The
deepest subjective experiences are also the most universal, because through
them one reaches the original source of life.
The origin of this song, part
cry from the heart, part reflective meditation, lies in suffering from a real
organic affliction- insomnia—and from the crisis of despair that it induced.
When Cioran writes that "the lyricism of
suffering is a song of the blood, the flesh, and the nerves," he gives us
a basic definition of his writing, in this book as well as in subsequent works
(despite their more subdued lyrical effusions): a writing in which tears turn
into thoughts. Writing and philosophizing are for Cioran
organically related to suffering. A running theme throughout On the Heights of Despair is that sickness and suffering
have "lyrical virtues" which alone lead to "metaphysical
revelations." "To suffer is to generate
knowledge," he will write later in Le mauvais demiurge. His life and his work are
the metamorphosis of tears: "They ask you for facts,
proofs, works, and all you can show them are transformed
tears" (Le mauvais demiurge,
131).
The lyrical state being
"beyond forms and systems," Cioran's
writing is grotesque, formless. The chapters of his book are like a chart of
his lyrical fevers, monitoring the rise and fall of his intense inner life,
faithfully tracing the course of his "dispersion of subjectivity."
They are unequal both in length and in tone. Long meditations on philosophical
themes are interspersed with brief lyrical outbursts, repetitive to the point
of being obsessive, often comical and humorous even though the prevalent mood
is one of despair. At other times, especially in the second half of the book, they
tend increasingly toward aphorism and paradox, the trademark of his later
writing. The style of the book, by turns lyrical and ironical, poetical and
paradoxical, rejects the technique of dry philosophical argument in favor of
suggestive and vivid imagery, and reveals the intellectual and spiritual agony
of the philosopher's mind in playful yet gripping ways, anticipating the later
Cioran's unique combination of elegant style and profoundly
felt thought.
This kind of
"grotesque" writing self-consciously sets itself against a whole
tradition of "civilized" writing and, with its emphasis on death,
suffering, and chaos, situates itself outside the domain of the aesthetic:
"Compared to the refined culture of forms and frames, which mask
everything, the lyrical mode is utterly barbarian in its expression. Its value
resides precisely in its savage quality: it is only blood, sincerity, and
fire." The young barbarian's horror of the refinements of sclerotic
cultures is a theme that will reappear in Cioran's portrayal
of the French in The Temptation to Exist. But
another, more fundamental aspect of Cioran's
philosophy is present here in his profession of faith in the resources of
"absolute lyricism," namely, his lucidity as a thinker who discovers
and mercilessly exposes the hollowness of all philosophical systems.
On the Heights
of Despair
is a drama enacted between the suffering problematic man, that is, the organic
and lyrical thinker who is Cioran's sufferer, and his
archenemy, the philosopher or the sage, the abstract man, a distinction
reminiscent of Nietzsche's Dionysian and Socratic man. Thus Cioran
writes that "Out of the shadow of the abstract man, who thinks for the
pleasure of thinking, emerges the organic man, who thinks because of a vital
imbalance, and who is beyond science and art." The organic or lyrical
thinker is the man who turns his tears into thoughts and whose thoughts are
obsessions. Here is his confession: "I like thought which preserves a
whiff of flesh and blood, and I prefer a thousand times an idea rising from
sexual tension or nervous depression to an empty abstraction." In the
clutches of utter despair, that state of heightened lucidity which is the
"negative equivalent of ecstasy," the lyrical thinker contemptuously
rejects the intellectual optimism of the abstract man:
Despair is the
state in which anxiety and restlessness are immanent to existence. Nobody in
despair suffers from "problems," but from his own inner torment and
fire. It's a pity that nothing can be solved in this world. Yet there never was
and there never will be anyone who would commit suicide for this reason. So
much for the power that intellectual anxiety has over the total anxiety of our
being! That is why I prefer the dramatic life, consumed by inner fires and
tortured by destiny, to the intellectual, caught up in abstractions which do
not engage the essence of our subjectivity. I despise the absence of risks,
madness, and passion in abstract thinking. How fertile live, passionate
thinking is! Lyricism feeds it like blood pumped into the heart!
Nietzsche, in The Birth of Tragedy, criticizes the optimism or
"Greek cheerfulness" that goes with the Platonic ideal of the
"dying Socrates, as the human being whom knowledge and reason have
liberated from the fear of death." Those who pursue this ideal ultimately
discover that "logic coils up at the boundaries [of science] and finally
bites its own tail," whereupon "a new form of insight breaks through,
tragic insight. "
Similarly, Cioran attacks "those who try to eliminate
the fear of death through artificial reasoning . . . because it is absolutely
impossible to cancel an organic fear by way of abstract constructs." For Cioran, not only is the philosopher's attempt to found a system an impossible endeavor; it is also a sterile
one, since the source of genuine human creativity lies precisely in suffering,
blood, tears, and the agony of death. "All important things bear the sign
of death:"
Haven't people learned yet that
the time of superficial intellectual games is over, that agony is infinitely
more important than syllogism, that a cry of despair
is more revealing than the most subtle thought, and that tears always have
deeper roots than smiles?
In this spirit, an attitude
which characterizes his later works as well (Valery face a ses idoles),
Cioran rejects philosophical systems which only
manage to reduce the profound to the expressible:
Those who write under the spell
of inspiration, for whom thought is an expression of their organic nervous
disposition, do not concern themselves with unity and systems. Such concerns,
contradictions, and facile paradoxes indicate an impoverished and insipid
personal life. Only great and dangerous contradictions betoken a rich spiritual
life because only they constitute a mode of realization for life's abundant
inner flow.
Savater calls Cioran's philosophical
discourse "antipedagogical." It tackles
major philosophical themes but deliberately resists taking shape as an
informative and constructive discourse. It does not aspire to produce anything
"new" on the subject, thus renouncing all false pretensions to
originality. "It never recommends anything except the horrible and the
impossible and even that only ironically." Cioran
never tires of saying that he believes in nothing. His "destructive"
discourse, going against the grain of traditional philosophical practice,
unremittingly seeks to expose the contradictions inherent in any philosophical
system and cultivates with relish all contraries, conferring upon them equal value
and equally little significance:
Everything is possible, and yet
nothing is. All is permitted, and yet again, nothing. No matter which way we
go, it is no better than any other. . . . There is an explanation for
everything, and yet there is none. Everything is both real
and unreal, normal and absurd, splendid and insipid. There is nothing worth
more than something else, nor any idea better than
another. . . . All gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. Why always expect a
definite stance, clear ideas, meaningful words? I feel
as if I should spout fire in response to all the questions which were ever put,
or not put, to me.
In
Syllogismes de I'amertume, Cioran recalls in a short anecdote how, as a young and ambitious
philosophy student, he wanted to write a thesis on an extremely original topic
and chose, to his professor's dismay, a "general theory of tears." It
may be that On the Heights of Despair was written
in lieu of this proposed "theory of tears." It received the prize of
the King Carol I Foundation for Literature and Art. My young Cioran is a philosopher who could not or would not
philosophize abstractly and systematically and who, in a dramatic turnabout of
which On the Heights of Despair is the painstaking
record, became a poet. As a poet, he continued to philosophize—poetically.
NOTE ON THE TEXT This translation aims at
capturing the lyrical, whimsical spirit of Cioran's
original Romanian, not a literal, word-for-word accuracy. Principally, this has
meant a trimming of Cioran's youthful prose, mainly
those passages that sound florid or redundant in English. All such cuts,
changes, and revisions were either made by or approved by the author, who has
also cut additional passages and sections that were conceptually repetitive.
WORKS
CITED
Calinescu, Matei. "Reflections on Mihail Sebastian's For Two Thousand
Years (1934): Reading, Fiction, History." Forthcoming
in Salmagundi, 1992.
Cioran, E. M. Des larmes et des
saints, trans. Sanda Stolojan.
Paris: L'Herne,
1986.
—. Le mauvais demiurge.
Paris: Gallimard, 1969.
—. Syllogismes de l'amertume.
Paris: Gallimard, 1952.
—. La tentation d'exister.
Paris: Gallimard, 1952.
Nietzsche,
Friedrich. "The Birth of Tragedy." In The Birth of Tragedy and the Case of Wagner,
ed. Walter Kaufmann. New York: Vintage, 1967.
Savater, Fernando. Ensayo sobre Cioran.
Madrid: Taurus, 1974.
—. "El
Ultimo Dandi." El Pais, October 25, 1990.
Ilinca Zarifopol-Johnston
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On Being Lyrical
Why can't we stay closed up inside
ourselves? Why do we chase after expression and form, trying to deliver
ourselves of our precious contents or "meanings," desperately
attempting to organize what is after all a rebellious and chaotic process?
Wouldn't it be more creative simply to surrender to our inner fluidity without
any intention of objectifying it, intimately and voluptuously soaking in our
own inner turmoil and struggle? Then we would feel with much richer intensity
the whole inner growth of spiritual experience. All kinds of insights would
blend and flourish in a fertile effervescence. A sensation of actuality and
spiritual content would be born, like the rise of a wave or a musical phrase.
To be full of one's self, not in the sense of pride, but of enrichment, to be
tormented by a sense of inner infinity, means to live so intensely that you
feel you are about to die of life. Such a feeling is so rare and strange that
we would live it out with shouts. I feel I could die of life, and I ask myself
if it makes any sense to look for an explanation. When your entire spiritual
past vibrates inside you with a supreme tension, when a sense of total presence
resurrects buried experiences and you lose your normal rhythm, then, from the
heights of life, you are caught by death without the fear which normally
accompanies it. It is a feeling similar to that experienced by lovers on the
heights of happiness, when they have a passing but intense intimation of death
or when a Premonition of betrayal haunts their budding love.
Only a few can endure such
experiences to the end. There is always a serious danger in repressing
something which requires objectification, in locking up explosive energy,
because there comes a moment when one cannot restrain such overwhelming power.
And then the fall is from too much plenitude. There are experiences and
obsessions one cannot live with. Salvation lies in confessing them. The
terrifying experience of death, when preserved in consciousness, becomes
ruinous. If you talk about death, you save part of your self.
But at the same time, something of your real self dies,
because objectified meanings lose the actuality they have in consciousness.
This is why lyricism represents a dispersion of subjectivity; it is a certain
quantity of an individual's spiritual effervescence which cannot be contained
and needs constant expression. To be lyrical means you cannot stay closed up
inside yourself. The need to externalize is the more intense, the more the
lyricism is interiorized, profound, and concentrated. Why is the suffering or
loving man lyrical? Because such states, although different in nature and
orientation, spring up from the deepest and most intimate part of our being,
from the substantial center of subjectivity, as from a radiation zone. One
becomes lyrical when one's life beats to an essential rhythm and the experience
is so intense that it synthesizes the entire meaning of one's personality. What
is unique and specific in us is then realized in a form so expressive that the
individual rises onto a universal plane. The deepest subjective experiences
are also the most universal, because through them one reaches the original
source of life. True interiorization leads to a
universality inaccessible to those who remain on the periphery. The vulgar
interpretation of universality calls it a phenomenon of quantitative expansion
rather than a qualitatively rich containment. Such an interpretation sees
lyricism as a peripheral and inferior phenomenon, the product of spiritual
inconsistency, failing to notice that the lyrical resources of subjectivity
show remarkable freshness and depth. There are people who become lyrical only
at crucial moments in their life; some only in the throes of death, when their
entire past suddenly appears before them and hits them with the force of a
waterfall. Many become lyrical after some decisively critical experience, when
the turmoil of their inner being reaches paroxysm. Thus people who are normally
inclined toward objectivity and impersonality, strangers both to themselves
and to reality, once they become prisoners of love, experience feelings which
actualize all their personal resources. The fact that almost everybody writes
poetry when in love proves that the resources of conceptual thinking are too
poor to express their inner infinity; inner lyricism finds adequate
objectification only through fluid, irrational material. The experience of
suffering is a similar case. You never suspected what lay hidden in yourself
and in the world, you were living contentedly at the
periphery of things, when suddenly those feelings of suffering which are second
only to death itself take hold of you and transport you into a region of
infinite complexity, where your subjectivity tosses about in a maelstrom. To be
lyrical from suffering means to achieve that inner purification in which wounds
cease to be mere outer manifestations without deep complications and begin to
participate in the essence of your being. The lyricism of suffering is a song
of the blood, the flesh, and the nerves. True suffering begins in illness.
Almost all illnesses have lyrical virtues. Only those who vegetate in a
scandalous insensitivity remain impersonal when ill, and thus miss that
deepening of the personality brought about by illness. One does not become
lyrical except after a total organic affliction. Accidental lyricism has its
source in external factors; once they have disappeared, their inner
correspondent also disappears. There is no authentic lyricism without a grain
of interior madness. It is significant that the beginnings of all mental psychoses
are marked by a lyrical phase during which all the usual barriers and limits
disappear, giving way to an inner drunkenness of the most fertile, creative
kind. This explains the poetic productivity characteristic of the first phases
of psychoses. Consequently, madness could be seen as a sort of paroxysm of
lyricism. For this reason, we should rather write in praise of lyricism than
in praise of folly. The lyrical state is a state beyond forms and systems. A
sudden fluidity melts all the elements of our inner life in one fell swoop, and
creates a full and intense rhythm, an ideal convergence. Compared to the
refined culture of sclerotic forms and frames, which mask everything, the
lyrical mode is utterly barbarian in its expression. Its value resides
precisely in its savage quality: it is only blood, sincerity, and fire.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
How Distant Everything Is!
I don't understand why we must
do things in this world, why we must have friends and aspirations, hopes and
dreams. Wouldn't it be better to retreat to a
faraway corner of the world, where all its noise and complications would be
heard no more? Then we could renounce culture and ambitions; we would lose
everything and gain nothing; for what is there to be gained from this world?
There are people to whom gain is unimportant, who are hopelessly unhappy and
lonely. We are so closed to one another! And yet, were we to be totally open to
each other, reading into the depths of our souls, how much of our destiny would
we see? We are so lonely in life that we must ask ourselves if the loneliness
of dying is not a symbol of our human existence. Can there be any consolation
at the last moment? This willingness to live and die in society is a mark of
great deficiency. It is a thousand times preferable to die somewhere alone and
abandoned so that you can die without melodramatic posturing, unseen by anyone.
I despise people who on their deathbed master themselves and adopt a pose in
order to impress. Tears do not burn except in solitude. Those who ask to be
surrounded by friends when they die do so out of fear and inability to live
their final moments alone. They want to forget death at the moment of death.
They lack infinite heroism. Why don't they lock their door and suffer those
maddening sensations with a lucidity and a fear beyond
all limits?
We are so isolated form
everything! But isn't everything equally inaccessible to us? The deepest and
most organic death is death in solitude, when even light becomes a principle of
death. In such moments you will be severed from life, from love, smiles, friends and even from death. And you will ask yourself if
there is anything besides the nothingness of the world and your own
nothingness.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On Not Wanting to Live
There are experiences which one
cannot survive, after which one feels that there is no meaning left in
anything. Once you have reached the limits of life, having lived to extremity
all that is offered at those dangerous borders, the everyday gesture and the
usual aspiration lose their seductive charm. If you go on living, you do so
only through your capacity for objectification, your ability to free yourself,
in writing, from the infinite strain. Creativity is a temporary salvation from
the claws of death.
I feel I must burst because of
all that life offers me and because of the prospect of death. I feel that I am
dying of solitude, of love, of despair, of hatred, of all that this world
offers me. With every experience I expand like a balloon blown up beyond its
capacity. The most terrifying intensification bursts into nothingness. You
grow inside, you dilate madly until there are no boundaries left, you reach
the edge of light, where light is stolen by night, and from that plenitude as
in a savage whirlwind you are thrown straight into nothingness. Life breeds both plenitude and void, exuberance and depression. What are
we when confronted with the interior vortex which swallows us into absurdity? I
feel my life cracking within me from too much intensity, too much
disequilibrium. It is like an explosion which cannot be contained, which
throws you up in the air along with everything else. At the edge of life you
feel that you are no longer master of the life within you, that subjectivity is
an illusion, and that uncontrollable forces are seething inside you, evolving
with no relation to a personal center or a definite, individual rhythm. At the
edge of life everything is an occasion for death. You die because of all there
is and all there is not. Every experience is in this case a leap into
nothingness. When you have lived everything life has offered you to a paroxysm
of supreme intensity, you have reached the stage at which you can no longer
experience anything, because there is nothing left. Even if you have not exhausted
all the possibilities of these experiences, it is enough to have lived the
principal ones to their limit. And when you feel that you are
dying of loneliness, despair, or love, all that you have not experienced joins
in this endlessly sorrowful procession.
The feeling that you cannot
survive such whirlwinds also arises from a consummation on a purely inner
plane. The flames of life burn in a closed oven from which
the heat cannot escape. Those who live on an external plane are saved
from the outset: but do they have anything to save when they are not aware of
any danger? The paroxysm of interior experience leads you to regions where
danger is absolute, because life which self-consciously actualizes its roots in
experience can only negate itself. Life is too limited and too fragmentary to
endure great tensions. Did not all the mystics feel that they could not live
after their great ecstasies? What could they expect from this world, those who
sense, beyond the normal limits, life, loneliness, despair, and death?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Passion for the Absurd
There
are no arguments. Can anyone who has reached the limit bother with arguments,
causes, effects, moral considerations, and so forth? Of
course not. For such a person there are only unmotivated motives for
living. On the heights of despair, the passion for the absurd is the only
thing that can still throw a demonic light on chaos. When all the current
reasons—moral, esthetic, religious, social, and so on—no longer guide one's
life, how can one sustain life without succumbing to nothingness? Only by a
connection with the absurd, by love of absolute uselessness, loving something
which does not have substance but which simulates an illusion of life.
I live because the mountains do not laugh and the
worms do not sing. The passion for the absurd can grow only in a man who has
exhausted everything, yet is still capable of undergoing awesome
transfigurations. For one who has lost everything there is nothing left in
life except the passion of the absurd. What else in
life could still move such a person? What seductions? Some say: selfsacrifice for humanity, the public good, the cult of
the beautiful, and so forth. I like only those people who have done away with
all that—even for a short time. Only they have lived in an absolute manner.
Only they have the right to speak about life. You can recover love or serenity.
But you recover it through heroism, not ignorance. An existence which does not
hide a great madness has no value. How is
it different from the existence of a stone, a piece of wood, or something
rotten? And yet I tell you: you must hide a great madness in order to want to become stone, wood, or rot. Only when you have
tasted all the poisoning sweetness of the absurd are you fully purified, because only
then will you have pushed negation to its final expression. And are not all
final expressions absurd?
THERE ARE PEOPLE who are destined to taste only the poison
in things, for whom any surprise is a painful surprise
and any experience a new occasion for torture. If someone were to say to me
that such suffering has subjective reasons, related to the individual's
particular makeup, I would then ask; Is there an
objective criterion for evaluating suffering? Who can say with precision that
my neighbor suffers more than I do or that Jesus suffered more than all of us?
There is no objective standard because suffering cannot be measured according
to the external stimulation or local irritation of the organism, but only as it
is felt and reflected in consciousness. Alas, from this point of view, any
hierarchy is out of the question. Each person remains with his own suffering,
which he believes absolute and unlimited. How much would we diminish our own
personal suffering if we were to compare it to all the world's sufferings until
now, to the most horrifying agonies and the most complicated tortures, the
most cruel deaths and the most painful betrayals, all the lepers, all those
burned alive or starved to death? Nobody is comforted in his sufferings by the
thought that we are all mortals, nor does anybody who
suffers really find comfort in the past or present suffering of others. Because
in this organically insufficient and fragmentary world, the individual is set
to live fully, wishing to make of his own existence an absolute. Each
subjective existence is absolute to itself. For this reason each man lives as
if he were the center of the universe or the center of history. Then how could
his suffering fail to be absolute? I cannot understand another's suffering in
order to diminish my own. Comparisons in such cases are irrelevant, because
suffering is an interior state, in which nothing external can help.
But
there is a great advantage in the loneliness of suffering. What would happen if
a man's face could adequately express his suffering, if his entire inner agony
were objectified in his facial expression? Could we still communicate? Wouldn't
we then cover our faces with our hands while talking? Life would really be
impossible if the infinitude of feelings we harbor within ourselves were fully
expressed in the lines of our faces.
Nobody would dare look at
himself in the mirror, because a grotesque, tragic image would mix in the
contours of his face with stains and traces of blood, wounds which cannot be
healed, and unstoppable streams of tears. I would experience a kind of
voluptuous awe if I could see a volcano of blood, eruptions as red as fire and
as burning as despair, burst into the midst of the comfortable and superficial
harmony of everyday life, or if I could see all our hidden wounds open, making
of us a bloody eruption forever. Only then would we truly understand and
appreciate the advantage of loneliness, which silences our suffering and makes
it inaccessible. The venom drawn out from suffering would be enough to poison the
whole world in a bloody eruption, bursting out of the volcano of our being.
There is so much venom, so much poison, in suffering!
TRUE
SOLITUDE is
the feeling of being absolutely isolated between the earth and the sky. Nothing
should detract attention from these phenomena of absolute isolation: a
fearfully lucid intuition will reveal the entire drama of man's finite nature
facing the infinite nothingness of the world. Solitary walks—extremely fertile
and dangerous at the same time, for the inner life—must take place in such a
way that nothing will obscure the solitary's meditation on man's isolation in
the world. Solitary walks are propitious to an intense process of interiorization especially in the evening, when none of the
usual seductions can steal one's interest. Then revelations about the world
spring from the deepest corner of the spirit, from the place where it has
detached itself from life, from the wound of life. To achieve spirituality, one
must be very lonely. So much death-in-life and so many inner conflagrations!
Loneliness negates so much of life that the spirit's blooming in vital
dislocations becomes almost insufferable. Isn't it significant that those who
have too much spirit, who know the deep wound inflicted on life at the birth of
the spirit, are the ones who rise against it? Healthy, fat people, without the
least intuition of what spirit is, who have never suffered the tortures of
life and the painful antinomies at the base of existence, are the ones who rise
up in defense of the spirit. Those who truly know it either tolerate it with
pride or regard it as a calamity. Nobody can really be pleased at the bottom of
his heart with spirit, an acquisition so damaging to life. How can one be
pleased with life without its charm, naivete, and
spontaneity? The presence of the spirit indicates a want of life, great
loneliness, and long suffering. Who dares talk of salvation through the spirit?
It is by no means true that life on the immanent plane creates an anxiety from
which man escapes through the spirit. On the contrary, it is much more true that through spirit man achieves disequilibrium,
anxiety as well as grandeur. What do you expect those who don't know the
dangers of life to know of the dangers of the spirit? To argue the case for
spirit is a sign of great ignorance, just as to make a case for life is a sign
of great disequilibrium. For the normal man, life is an undisputed reality;
only the sick man is delighted by life and praises it so that he won't
collapse. And what about the man who cannot praise either
life or the spirit?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The World and I
I am: therefore the world is meaningless. What meaning is there in the
tragic suffering of a man for whom everything is ultimately nothing and whose only
law in this world is agony? If the world tolerates somebody like me, this can
only mean that the blots on I the so-called sun of
life are so large that in time they will obscure its light. Life's beastliness
trampled me under foot and oppressed me, clipped my wings in full flight and
stole all my rightful joys. 1
The
enthusiastic zeal and mad passion I put into becoming a brilliant individual,
the demonic charm I adopted to gain an aura in the future, and the energy I
spent on an organic, glamorous, inner rebirth, all proved weaker than the
beastly brutality and irrationality of this world, which poured into me all
its reserves of negativity and poison. Life is impossible at high temperatures.
That's why I have reached the conclusion that anguished people, whose inner
dynamism is so intense that it reaches paroxysm, and who cannot accept normal
temperatures, are doomed to 1 fall. The destruction of those who live unusual
lives is an aspect of life's demonism, but it is also an aspect of its insufficiency,
which explains why life is the privilege of mediocre people. Only mediocrities
live at life's normal temperature; the others are consumed at temperatures at
which life cannot endure, at which they can barely breathe, already one foot
beyond life. I cannot contribute anything to this world because I only have
one method: agony. You complain that people are mean, vengeful, ungrateful, and
hypocritical? I propose the agony method to rid you of all these imperfections.
Apply it to every generation and its effects will soon be evident. Maybe in this
way I too could become useful to mankind!
Bring
every man to the agony of life's last moments by whip, fire, or injections, and
through terrible torture he will undergo the great purification afforded by a
vision of death. Then free him and let him run in a fright until he falls
exhausted. I warrant you that the effect is incomparably greater than any
obtained through normal means. If I could, I would drive the entire world to
agony to achieve a radical purification of life; I would set a fire burning
insidiously at the roots of life, not to destroy them but to give them a new
and different sap, a new heat. The fire I would set to the world would not
bring ruin but cosmic transfiguration. In this way life would adjust to higher
temperatures and would cease to be an environment propitious to mediocrity. And
maybe in this dream, death too would cease to be immanent in life.
(These lines
written today, April 8, 1933, when I turn twenty- two. It is strange to think that I
am already a specialist in the question of death.)
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Weariness and Agony
Are
you familiar with the frightening sensation of melting, the feeling of
dissolving into a flowing river, in which the self is annulled by organic liquidization? Everything solid and substantial in you
melts away in a wearisome fluidity, and the only thing left is your head. I'm
speaking of a precise painful sensation, not a vague and undetermined one. As
in a hallucinatory dream, you feel that only your head is left, without
foundation and support, without a body. This feeling has nothing to do with
that vague and voluptuous weariness by the seaside or in melancholy dreamy
musings; it is a weariness which consumes and destroys. No effort, no hope, no
illusion can satisfy you any longer. Shocked witless by your own catastrophe,
unable to think or to act, caught in cold and heavy darkness, solitary as in
moments of profound regret, you have reached the negative limit of life, its
absolute temperature, where the last illusions about life freeze. The true meaning of agony, which is not a struggle of pure passion
or gratuitous fantasy, but life's hopeless struggle in the claws of death, is
revealed in this feeling of great weariness. One cannot separate the
thought of agony from that of weariness and death. Agony as
struggle? But with whom and for what? The
interpretation of agony as an ardor exalted by its own futility, or as a battle
whose aim is itself, is absolutely false. In fact,
agony means a battle between life and death. Since death is immanent in life,
almost all of life is an agony. I call agonic only those dramatic moments in
the battle between life and death when the presence of death is experienced
consciously and painfully. True agony occurs when you pass into nothingness
through death, when a feeling of weariness consumes you irrevocably and death
wins. In every true agony there is a triumph of death, even though you may
continue to live after those moments of weariness.
There is nothing imaginary in
this turmoil. Every agony bears a conclusive stamp. Isn't agony similar to an
incurable sickness which torments us intermittently? Agonic moments chart the
progress of death in life, revealing a drama in our consciousness caused by
the disruption of the balance between life and death. Such moments are not
possible except in that sensation of weariness which brings life down to its
absolute negative value. Frequency of agonic moments is an indicator of
decomposition and ruin. Death is something disgusting, the only obsession which
cannot become voluptuous. Even when you want to die, you do it with an implicit
regret for your own desire. / want to die, but I
am sorry that I want to die. This is the feeling experienced by
those who abandon themselves to nothingness. The most perverse
feeling is the feeling of death. Imagine that there are people
who cannot sleep because of their perverse obsession with death! How I wish I
did not know anything about myself and this world!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Despair and the Grotesque
Among the many forms of the
grotesque, I find the one whose roots are steeped in despair more unusual and
complex. The other forms have less intensity. It is important to note that the
grotesque is inconceivable without intensity of feeling. And what intensity is
deeper and more organic than despair? The grotesque appears only in very
negative states, when great anxiety arises from a lack of life; the grotesque
is an exaltation in negativity.
There is a mad launch toward
negativity in that bestial, agonizing grimace when the shape and lines of the
face are contorted into strangely expressive forms, when the look in one's eyes
changes with distant light and shadow, and one's thoughts follow the curve of
similar distortions. Truly intense and irrevocable despair cannot be objectified
except in grotesque expressions, because the grotesque is the absolute
negation of serenity, that state of purity, transparence, and lucidity so
different from the chaos and nothingness of despair. Have you ever had the
brutal and amazing satisfaction of looking at yourself in the mirror after
countless sleepless nights? Have you suffered the torment of insomnia, when
you count the minutes for nights on end, when you feel alone in this world,
when your drama seems to be the most important in history and history ceases to
have meaning, ceases to exist? When the most terrifying flames grow in you and
your existence appears unique and isolated in a world made only for the
consummation of your agony? You must have felt those moments, as countless and
infinite as suffering, in order to have a clear picture of the grotesque when
you look at yourself in the mirror. It is a picture of total strain, a tense
grimace to which is added the demonically seductive pallor of a man who has
struggled along horrible, dark precipices. Isn't this grotesque expression of
despair similar to a precipice? It has something of the abysmal maelstrom of
great depths, the seduction of the all- encompassing infinite to which we bow
as we bow to fatality. How good it would be if one could die by throwing
oneself into an infinite void! The complexity of the grotesque born out of despair
resides in its capacity to indicate an inner infinity and to produce a paroxysm
of the highest tension. How could this intense agony manifest itself in
pleasant linear curves and formal purity? The grotesque essentially negates the
classic, as well as any idea of style, harmony, and perfection.
It is evident to anyone who
understands the multiple forms of inner drama that the grotesque hides secret tragedies,
indirectly expressed. Whoever has seen his face grotesquely disfigured can
never forget it, because he will always be afraid of himself. Despair is
followed by painful anxiety. What else does the grotesque do if it does not
actualize fear and anxiety?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Premonition of Madness
We generally find it hard to
understand that some of us must go mad. But sliding into chaos, where moments
of lucidity are like short flashes of lightning, is an
inexorable fatality. Inspired pages of absolute lyricism, in which you are the
prisoner of a total drunkenness of being, can only be written in a state of
such exalted nervous tension that any return to equilibrium is an illusion.
One cannot live normally after such efforts. The intimate springs of being can
no longer sustain normal evolution, and inner barriers lose all reality. The
premonition of madness appears only after such capital experiences. One loses
one's sense of security and the normal sensation of the immediate and the
concrete, as if one were soaring to heights and suffering from vertigo. A heavy
load weighs on the brain, compressing it to an illusion, although the
frightening organic reality from which our experiences spring can only be
revealed through such sensations. An indefinable terror arises from this
oppression, throwing you to the ground or blowing you up in the air. It is not
just the suffocating fear of death that obsesses man; it is another terror,
occurring rarely but intensely like flashes of lightning, like a sudden
disturbance which forever eliminates the hope of future serenity.
It is impossible to pinpoint
and define this strange premonition of madness. The truly awful thing in
madness is that we sense a total and irrevocable loss of life while we are
still living. I continue to eat and drink, but I have lost whatever
consciousness I bring to my biological functions. It is only an approximate
death. In madness one loses the specific individual traits which single one out
in the universe, the personal perspective and a certain orientation of
consciousness. In death one loses everything, by a fall into nothingness. That
is why the fear of death is per- istent and
essential, but actually less strange than the fear of madness, in which our semipresence creates an anxiety more complex than the
organic fear of the total nothingness of death. but
wouldn't madness be an escape from the misery of life? This question has only a
theoretical justification, since, practically speaking, for the anguished man
the problem appears in a different light, or, rather, in a different shadow.
The premonition of madness is complicated by the fear of lucidity in madness, the fear
of the moments of return and reunion, when the intuition of disaster is so
painful that it almost provokes a greater madness. There is no salvation
through madness, because no man with a premonition of madness can overcome his
fear of possible moments of lucidity. One would
welcome chaos if one were not afraid of lights in it.
The specific form of one's madness
is determined by organic and temperamental conditions. Since the majority of
madmen are depressive, depressive madness is inevitably more common than
pleasant, gay, manic exaltation. Black melancholy is so frequent among madmen
that almost all of them have suicidal tendencies, whereas for sane people
suicide appears a very problematic solution.
I      would like to go mad on one
condition, namely, that I would become a happy madman, lively and always in a
good mood, without any troubles and obsessions, laughing senselessly from
morning to night. Although I long for luminous ecstasies, I wouldn't ask for
any, because I know they are followed by great depressions. I would like
instead a shower of warm light to fall from me, transfiguring the entire world,
an unecstatic burst of light preserving the calm of
luminous eternity. Far from the concentrations of ecstasy, it would be all
graceful lightness and smiling warmth. The entire world should float in this
dream of light, in this transparent and unreal state of delight. Obstacles and matter, form and limits would cease to exist. Then let me
die of light in such a landscape.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On Death
There are questions which, once
approached, either isolate you or kill you outright. Afterward you have nothing
more to lose. From then on, your erstwhile "serious" pursuits—your
spiritual quest for more varied forms of life, your limitless longing for inaccessible
things, your elevated frustration with the limits of empiricism—all become
simple manifestations of an excessively exuberant sensibility, lacking the
profound seriousness which characterizes the man who has penetrated the realm
of dangerous mysteries. I'm not talking here of the spiritual calm and empty
solemnity of so-called serious people but of a mad tension that puts every
moment of your life on the plane of eternity. This profound seriousness cannot
be achieved by confronting purely formal problems, no matter how difficult,
because they are generated exclusively by our intelligence, not by the total
organic structure of our being. Only the organic and
existential thinker is capable of this kind of seriousness, because truth for
him is alive, born from inner agony and organic disorder rather than useless
speculation. Out of the shadow of the abstract man, who thinks for the
pleasure of thinking, emerges the organic man, who thinks because of a vital
imbalance, and who is beyond science and art. I like thought which preserves a
whiff of flesh and blood, and I prefer a thousand times an idea rising from
sexual tension or nervous depression to an empty abstraction. Haven't people
learned yet that the time of superficial intellectual games is over, that agony
is infinitely more important than syllogism, that a
cry of despair is more revealing than the most subtle thought, and that tears
always have deeper roots than smiles? Why don't we want to acknowledge the exclusive value of live truths, of truths born in us
and revealing a reality proper only to us?
Why don't we want to accept that
one can entertain lively meditations on death, the most dangerous issue
existing? Death is not something from outside, ontologically different from
life, because there is no death independent of life. To
step into death does not mean, as commonly believed, especially by Christians,
to draw one's last breath and to pass into a region qualitatively different
from life. It means, rather, to discover in the course of life the way toward
death and to find in life's vital signs the immanent abyss of death. For
Christianity and other metaphysical beliefs in immortality, the passing into
death is a triumph, an opening toward other
regions metaphysically different from life. Contrary to such visions, the true
sense of agony seems to me to lie in the revelation of death's immanence in
life. But why is the experience of agony so rare? Can it be that our hypothesis
is entirely false and that sketching a metaphysics of
death is possible only by accepting death's transcendental nature?
Healthy, normal, mediocre people
cannot experience either agony or death. They live as if life had a definitive
character. It is an integral part of normal people's superficial equilibrium to
take life as absolutely independent from death and to objectify death as a
reality transcending life. That's why they perceive death as coming from the
outside, not as an inner fatality of life itself. One of the greatest delusions
of the average man is to forget that life is death's prisoner. Metaphysical
revelations begin only when one's superficial equilibrium starts to totter and
a painful struggle is substituted for naive spontaneity. The premontion of death is so rare in average people that one
can practically say that it does not exist. The fact that the presentiment of
death appears only when life is shaken to its foundations proves beyond doubt
the immanence of death in life. An insight into these depths shows us how
illusory is the belief in life's integrity and how
well founded the belief in a metaphysical substratum of demonism.
If death is immanent in life,
why does awareness of death make living impossible? The average man is not
troubled by this awareness because the process of passing into death happens
simply through a diminution of vital intensity. For such a man there is only
the agony of the last hour, not the long-lasting agony related to the very
premise of life. From a grave perspective, every step in life is a step into
death and memory is only the sign of nothingness. The average man, deprived of
metaphysical understanding, does not have this consciousness of progressive advance
into death, though neither he nor anyone else can escape its inexorable
destiny. But when consciousness becomes independent of life, the revelation of
death becomes so strong that its presence destroys all naivete, all joyful enthusiasm, and all natural
voluptuousness. To have the consciousness of death is something perverse and
extremely corrupt. The naive poetry of life, its seductions and charms, appear
empty of content. Equally empty are man's finalizing projects and his
theological illusions.
To see how death spreads over
this world, how it kills a tree and how it penetrates dreams, how it withers a
flower or a civilization, how it gnaws on the individual and on culture like a
destructive blight, means to be beyond tears and regrets, beyond system and
form. Whoever has not experienced the awful agony of death, rising and
spreading like a surge of blood, like the choking grasp of a snake which
provokes terrifying hallucinations, does not know the demonic character of life
and the state of inner effervescence from which great transfigurations arise. Such a state of black drunkenness is a necessary
prerequisite to understanding why one wishes the immediate end of this world.
It's not the luminous drunkenness of ecstasy, in which paradisal
visions conquer you with their splendor and you rise to a purity that
sublimates into immateriality, but a mad, dangerous, ruinous, and tormented
black drunkenness, in which death appears with the awful seduction of
nightmarish snake eyes. To experience such sensations and images means to be
so close to the essence of reality that both life and death shed their
illusions and attain within you their most dramatic form. An exalted agony
combines life and death in a horrible maelstrom: a beastly satanism borrows tears from voluptuousness. Life as
a long agony on the road to death is nothing but another manifestation of
life's demoniacal dialectics, in which forms are given birth only to be
destroyed. The irrationality of life manifests itself in this overhelming expansion of form and content, in this
frenetic impulse to substitute new aspects for old ones, a substitution,
however, without qualitative improvement. Happy the man who could abandon
himself to this becoming and could absorb all the possibilities offered each
moment, ignoring the agonizingly problematic evaluation which discovers in
every moment an insurmountable relativity. Naivete
is the only road to salvation. But for those who feel and conceive life as a
long agony, the question of salvation is a simple one. There is no salvation on
their road.
The revelation of death's
immanence in life occurs during illnesses and long depressive states. There
are, of course, other ways, but they are accidental and individual, and do not
have the same potential for revelation as illness or depression.
If illnesses have a
philosophical mission in the world, then it can only be to prove how illusory
is the feeling of life's eternity and how fragile its illusion of finality. In
illness, death is always already in life. Genuine ailment links us to
metaphysical realities which the healthy, average man cannot understand. Young
people talk of death as external to life. But when an illness hits them with
full power, all the illusions and seductions of youth disappear. In this world,
the only genuine agonies are those sprung from illness. All others bear the
fatal mark of bookishness. Only those who truly suffer are capable of genuine
content and infinite seriousness. The others are born to harmony, love, dance,
and gracefulness. And there are many who would gladly give up metaphysical
revelations, obtained through despair, agony, and death, in exchange for a
naive love or the voluptuous unconsciousness of dance. And there are many who
would renounce glory acquired through suffering for an anonymous happy
existence.
All illnesses are heroic, but
with a heroism of resistance, not of conquest. The heroism of illness defends
life's lost redoubts. The losses are irrevocable not only for sick people but
also for those who suffer frequently from depressive fits. This explains why
current psychological interpretations find no adequate justification for the
fear of death common in some types of depression. The structure of depressive
states holds the key to their fundamental understanding. These states, in which
separation from the world steadily and painfully increases, bring man closer to
his inner reality and cause him to discover death in his own subjectivity. A
growing interiority progresses toward the essential center of subjectivity,
overcoming all the social forms which usually mask it. Once beyond this
center, progressive interiority discovers the region where life mingles with
death, where man has not yet detached himself from the primary sources of
existence, where the demonic rhythm of life works with complete irrationality.
In cases of depression, the awareness of death's immanence in life creates an
atmosphere of constant dissatisfaction and restlessness that can never be
appeased.
The
presence of death in life introduces into one's existence an element of
nothingness. One cannot conceive of death without nothingness, nor of life without a principle of negativity. The fear of
death, which is nothing but the fear of the nothingness into which death throws
us, proves that death presupposes nothingness. The immanence of death in life
is a sign of the final triumph of nothingness over life, thus showing that the
presence of death has no other meaning than to open progressively the way
toward nothingness.
Even
though belief in eternity is necessary as historical man's unique consolation,
the catastrophic ending of this tragedy of life and of man in particular will
demonstrate the illusion of such naive faith.
The
only fear is, in fact, the fear of death. Different kinds of fears are merely a
manifestation of the same fundamental psychological reality in its various
aspects. Those who try to eliminate the fear of death through artificial
reasoning are totally mistaken, because it is impossible to cancel an organic
fear by way of abstract constructs. Whoever seriously considers the question of
death must be afraid. Even those who believe in eternity do so because they
are afraid of death. There is in their faith a painful effort to save—even
without an absolute certitude—the world of values in which they live and to
which they contribute, an effort to defeat the nothingness inherent in the
temporal and attain the universal in eternity. Death met without religious faith leaves nothing
standing. Universal category and form berne
illusory and irrelevant when confronted with the irreversible annihilation of
death. Never will form and category grasp the intimate meanings of life and
death. Could idealism or rationalism counteract death? Not
at all. Yet other philosophies and doctrines say almost nothing about death.
The only valid attitude is absolute silence or a cry of despair.
Some people maintain that the
fear of death does not have a deeper justification, because as long as there is an I there is no death, and once dead there is no / any
longer. These people have forgotten about the very strange phenomenon of
gradual agony. What comfort does this artificial distinction between the / and
death offer a man who has a strong premonition of death? What meaning can
logical argument or subtle thought have for someone deeply imbued with a
feeling of the irrevocable? All attempts to bring existential questions onto a
logical plane are null and void. Philosophers are too proud to confess their
fear of death and too supercilious to acknowledge the spiritual fecundity of
illness. Their reflections on death exhibit a hypocritical serenity; in fact,
they tremble with fear more than anyone else. One should not forget that
philosophy is the art of masking inner torments.
The feeling for the
irreversible and the irrevocable, which always accompanies the awareness of
agony, can achieve a painful acceptance mixed with fear, but there is no such
thing as love or sympathy for death. The art of dying cannot be learned,
because there is no technique, there are no rules. The irrevocability of agony
is experienced by each individual alone, through infinite and intense
suffering. Most people are unaware of the slow agony within themselves. For them
there is only one kind of agony, the one immediately preceding the fall into
absolute nothingness. Only such moments of agony bring about important
existential revelations in consciousness. That is why they expect everything
from the end instead of trying to grasp the meaning of a slow revelatory
agony. The end will reveal too little, and they will die as ignorant as they
have lived.
Since agony unfolds in time,
temporality is a condition not only for creativity but also for death, for the
dramatic phenomenon of dying. The demonic character of time, in which both life and death, creation and destruction, evolve
without convergence toward a transcendental plane, is thus made manifest.
The feeling of the irrevocable,
which appears as an ineluctable necessity going against the grain of our
innermost tendencies, is conceivable only because of time's demonism. The
conviction that you cannot escape an implacable fate and that time will do
nothing but unfold the dramatic process of destruction is an expression of
irrevocable agony. Isn't nothingness, then, salvation? But how can there be
salvation in nothingness? If salvation is nearly impossible through existence,
how can it be possible through the complete absence of existence?
Since there is no salvation
either in existence or in nothingness, let this world with its eternal laws be
smashed to pieces!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Melancholy
Every state of the soul adopts
its own external form or transforms the soul according to its nature. In all
great and profound states there is a close correspondence between the
subjective and the objective level. Overflowing enthusiasm is inconceivable in
a flat and closed space. Men's eyes see outwardly that which troubles them
internally. Ecstasy is never a purely internal consummation; it externalizes a
luminous inner intoxication. It would suffice simply to look at the face of an
ecstatic to grasp fully all the elements of his inner tension.
Why does melancholy require
exterior infinity? Because it is boundless and void
expansion. One can cross boundaries either positively or negatively.
Exuberance, enthusiasm, fury, are positive slates of
overflowing intensity which break restrictive barriers and go beyond normal
states. They spring from an excess of life, vitality, and organic expansion. In
such positive states, life goes beyond its normal boundaries not to negate
itself but to liberate its smoldering energies, which would otherwise unleash a
violent conflagration. Crossing boundaries has a totally different meaning for
negative spiritual states since it does not happen from an overflow of
plenitude but from quite the contrary. A void originates in the depths of
being, spreading progressively like a cancer.
The sensation of expansion
toward nothingness present in melancholy has its roots in a weariness
characteristic of all negative states. This weariness separates man from the
world. Life's intense rhythm, its organic inner pulse, weakens. Weariness is
the first organic determinant of knowledge. Because it creates the necessary
conditions for man's differentiation from the world, weariness leads one to the
perspective which places the world in front of man. Weariness also takes one
below life's normal level, allowing only a vague premonition of vital signs.
Melancholy therefore springs from a region where life is uncertain and problematic.
Its origin explains its fertility for knowledge and its sterility for life.
Whereas in ordinary states of
mind one is in close contact with life's individual
aspects, in melancholy, being separated from them produces a vague feeling of
the world. Solitary experience and a strange vision melt the substantial forms
of the world. They take on an immaterial and transparent garb. Progressive detachment
from all that is particular and concrete raises one to a vision which gains in
size what it loses in substance. No melancholy state can exist without this
ascent, this flight toward the heights, this elevation
above the world. Neither pride nor scorn, despair nor any
impulse toward infinite negativity, but long meditation and vague dreaminess
born of weariness lead to this kind of elevation. Man grows wings in
melancholy not in order to enjoy the world but in order to be alone. What is
the meaning of loneliness in melancholy? Isn't it related to the feeling of
interior and exterior infinity? The melancholy look is expressionless, without
perspective. The interior infinitude and vagueness of melancholy, not to be
confused with the fecund infinity of love, demands a space whose borders are
ungraspable. Melancholy is without clear or precise intentions, whereas
ordinary experience requires concrete objects and forms.
Melancholy detachment removes
man from his natural surroundings. His outlook on infinity shows him to be
lonely and forsaken. The sharper our consciousness of the
world's infinity, the more acute our awareness of our own finitude. In
some states this awareness is painfully depressing, but in melancholy it is
less tormenting and sometimes even rather voluptuous.
The disparity between the
world's infinity and man's finitude is a serious cause for despair; but when
one looks at this disparity in states of melancholy, it ceases to be painful
and the world appears endowed with a strange, sickly beauty. Real solitude implies
a painful intermission in man's life, a lonely struggle with the angel of
death. To live in solitude means to relinquish all expectations about life.
The only surprise in solitude is death. The great solitaries retreated from the
world not to prepare themselves for life but, rather, to await with
resignation its end. No messages about life ever issue forth from deserts and
caves. Haven't we proscribed all religions that began in the desert? All the
illuminations and dreams of the great solitaries reveal an apocalyptic vision
of downfall and the end rather than a crown of lights and triumphs.
The solitude of the melancholic
man is less profound. It even has sometimes an esthetic character. Don't we
talk of sweet melancholy or of voluptuous melancholy? Melancholy is an
esthetic mood because of its very passivity.
The esthetic attitude toward
life is characterized by contemplative passivity, randomly selecting
everything that suits its subjectivity. The world is a stage, and man, the
spectator, passively watches it. The conception of life as spectacle
eliminates its tragic element as well as those antinomies which drag you like a
whirlwind into the painful drama of the world. The esthetic experience, where
each moment is a matter of impressions, can hardly surmise the great tensions
inherent in the experience of the tragic, where each moment is a matter of
destiny. Dreaminess, central to all esthetic states, is absent from tragedy.
Passivity, dreaminess, and voluptuous enchantment form the esthetic elements
of melancholy. Yet, due to its multifarious forms, it is not purely esthetic.
Black melancholy is also fairly frequent.
But first, what is sweet
melancholy? On summer afternoons haven't you experienced that sensation of
strange pleasure when you abandon yourself to the senses without any special
thought and when intimations of serene eternity bring an unusual peace to your
soul? It is as if all worldly worries and all spiritual doubts grow dumb in
front of a display of overwhelming beauty, whose seductions render all
questions superfluous. Beyond turmoil and effervescence, a quiet existence
enjoys the surrounding splendor with discreet voluptuousness. Calm, the absence
of intensity of any kind, is essential to melancholy. Regret, also inherent in melancholy,
expands its lack of intensity. But though regret may be persistent, it is
never so intense as to cause deep suffering. Regret expresses affectively a
profound phenomenon: the advance through life into death. It shows us how much
has died in us. \ regret something which
died in me and from me. I bring back to life only the ghost of past
experiences. Regret reveals the demonic significance of time: while bringing
about growth, it implicitly triggers death.
Regret makes man
melancholy without paralyzing or cutting short his aspirations, because in
regret the awareness of the irredeemable focuses on the past and the future is
still left somewhat open. Melancholy is not a state of concentrated, closed
seriousness brought forth by an organic affliction, because it lacks the
terrible sense of irrevocability so characteristic of states of genuine
sadness. Even black melancholy is only a temporary mood, not a constitutional
feature. Its dreamy character never completely absent, black melancholy can
never be a true illness. Sweet and voluptuous melancholy, as well as black
melancholy, exhibits similar traits: interior void, exterior infinity,
vagueness of sensations, dreaminess, sublimation.
Their differentiation is apparent only from the point of view of affective
tonalities. It may be that the multipolarity of
melancholy derives more from the structure of subjectivity than from its own
nature. Not particularly intense, it fluctuates more than other states. Endowed
with more poetic than active virtues, it possesses a certain subdued
gracefulness totally absent from tragic and intense sadness.
The same gracefulness
marks melancholy landscapes. The wide perspective of Dutch or Renaissance
landscape, with its eternity of lights and shadows, its undulating vales
symbolizing infinity, its transfiguring rays of light which spiritualize the
material world and the hopes and regrets of men who smile wisely— the whole
perspective breathes an easy melancholy grace. In such a landscape, man seems
to say regretfully and resignedly: "What can we do? It's all we
have!" At the end of all melancholy there is a chance of consolation or
resignation. Its esthetic aspect holds possibilities for future harmony which
are absent from profound organic sadness. The latter ends in
the irrevocable, the former in graceful dream.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Nothing Is Important
How important can it
be that I suffer and think? My presence in this world will disturb a few
tranquil lives and will unsettle the unconscious and pleasant naivete of others. Although I feel that my tragedy is the
greatest in history—greater than the fall of empires—I am nevertheless aware of
my total insignificance. I am absolutely persuaded that I am nothing
in this universe; yet I feel that mine is the only real existence. If I had to choose
between the world and me, I would reject the world, its lights and laws, unafraid
to glide alone in absolute nothingness. Although life for me is torture, I
cannot renounce it, because I do not believe in the absolute values in whose
name I would sacrifice myself. If I were to be totally sincere, I would say
that I do not know why I live and why I do not stop living. The answer probably
lies in the irrational character of life which maintains itself without
reason. What if there were only absurd motives for living? Could they still be
called motives? This world is not worth a sacrifice in the name of an idea or a
belief. How much happier are we today because others have died for our
well-being and our enlightment? Well-being?
Enlightment? If anybody had died so that I could be happy, then I would
be even more unhappy, because I do not want to build
my life on a graveyard. There are moments when I feel responsible for all the
suffering in history, since I cannot understand why some have shed blood for
us. It would be a great irony if we could determine that they were happier than
we are. Let history crumble into dust! Why should I bother? Let death appear in
a ridiculous light; suffering, limited and unrevealing; enthusiasm, impure;
life, rational; life's dialectics, logical rather than demonic; despair, minor
and partial; eternity, just a word; the experience of nothingness, an illusion;
fatality, a joke! I seriously ask myself, What is the
meaning of all this? Why raise questions, throw lights, or see shadows?
Wouldn't it be better if I buried my tears in the sand on a
seashore in utter solitude? But I never cried, because my tears have
always turned into thoughts. And my thoughts are as bitter as tears.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Ecstasy
I do not know what
the skeptic, for whom this world is a world in which nothing is solved, thinks
of ecstasy—the richest and most dangerous ecstasy, the ecstasy of life's
ultimate origins. You do not gain explicit certainty or definite knowledge by
it; yet the feeling of essential participation is so intense that it surpasses
all limits and categories of common knowledge. A gate opens from this world of
toil, pain, and suffering to the inner sanctum of life, where we apprehend a
most simple vision in a glorious metaphysical trance. Superficial and
individual layers of existence melt away, revealing original depths. I wonder
whether a truly metaphysical feeling is even possible without the disappearance
of superficial forms? One reaches the center of life
only by purifying it of contingent and accidental elements. A metaphysical existential
feeling is by definition ecstatic, and all metaphysical systems have roots in
forms of ecstasy. There are many other forms of ecstasy which, given a certain
spiritual or temperamental configuration, do not necessarily lead to
transcendence. Why shouldn't there be an ecstasy of pure existence?
Metaphysical existentialism is born out of ecstasy in front of the world's
primordial origins; it is the ultimate intoxication, ecstatic bliss in the
contemplation of essence. Ecstasy—exaltation in immanence, illumination, a
vision of this world's madness—such is the basis of any metaphysics, valid even
in the final moments of life. Any true ecstasy is dangerous. It resembles the
last stage of initiation in the Egyptian mysteries when, instead of the
ultimate knowledge, one is told, "Osiris is a black divinity." The
absolute remains un- lovable. I see a form of madness, not of knowledge, in the
ecstasy of life's ultimate origins. You cannot experience it except in
solitude, when you feel as if you were floating above the world. Solitude is
the proper milieu for madness. It is noteworthy that even the skeptic can
experience this kind of ecstasy. Does not the madness of ecstasy reveal itself
through this odd combination of certitude and essence with doubt and despair?
Nobody will
experience ecstasy without having experienced despair beforehand, because both
states presuppose equally radical purifications, though different in kind.
The roots of metaphysics
are as complex as those of existence
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The World in Which Nothing Is Solved
Is there anything on
earth which cannot be doubted except death, the only certainty in this world? To
doubt and yet to live— this is a paradox, though not a tragic one, since doubt
is less intense, less consuming, than despair. Abstract doubt, in which one
participates only partially, is more frequent, whereas in despair one
participates totally and organically. Not even the most organic and serious
forms of doubt ever reach the intensity of despair. In comparison with
despair, skepticism is characterized by a certain amount of dilettantism and
superficiality. I can doubt everything, I may very well smile contemptuously at
the world, but this will not prevent me from eating, from sleeping peacefully,
and from marrying. In despair, whose depth one can fathom only by experiencing
it, such actions are possible only with great effort. On the heights of despair,
nobody has the right to sleep. Thus a genuinely desperate man cannot forget his
own tragedy: his consciousness preserves the painful actuality of his
subjective torment. Doubt is anxiety about problems and things, and has its
origins in the unsolvable nature of all big questions. If such questions could
be solved, the skeptic would revert to more normal states. The condition of the
desperate man in this respect is utterly different: if all problems were
solved, he would not be any less anxious, since his anxiety arises out of his
own subjective existence. Despair is the state in which anxiety and
restlessness are immanent to existence. Nobody in despair suffers from
Problems," but from his own inner torment and fire. It's a pity that
nothing can be solved in this world. Yet there never was and here never will be
anyone who would commit suicide for this reason. So much
for the power that intellectual anxiety has over the total anxiety of our
being! That is why I prefer the dramatic life, consumed by inner fires and
tortured by destiny, to the intellectual, caught up in abstractions which do
not engage the essence of our subjectivity. I despise the absence of risks,
madness and passion in abstract thinking. How fertile live, passionate thinking
is! Lyricism feeds it like blood pumped into the heart! It is interesting to
observe the dramatic process by which men, originally preoccupied with abstract
and impersonal problems, so objective as to forget themselves,
come to reflect upon their own subjectivity and upon existential questions once
they experience sickness and suffering. Active and objective men do not have
enough inner resources to make an interesting problem of their own destiny. One
must descend all the circles of an inner hell to turn one's destiny into a
subjective yet universal problem. If you are not burned to ashes, you will then
be able to philosophize lyrically. Only when you do not deign even to despise
this world of unsolvable problems will you finally come to achieve a superior
form of personal existence. And this will be so not because you have any
special value or excellence, but because nothing interests you beyond your own
personal agony.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Contradictory and the Inconsequential
Those who write under
the spell of inspiration, for whom thought is an expression of their organic
nervous disposition, do not concern themselves with unity and systems. Such
concerns, contradictions, and facile paradoxes indicate an impoverished and
insipid personal life. Only great and dangerous contradictions betoken a rich
spiritual life, because only they constitute a mode of realization for life's
abundant inner flow. People who know only a few spiritual states and never live
on the edge do not have contradictions, because their limited resources cannot
form oppositions. But how can those who violently experience hatred, despair,
chaos, nothingness, or love, who burn with each passion and gradually die with
each and in each, those who can only breathe on heights, who are always alone,
especially when they are with others—how can they grow in linear fashion and
crystallize into a system? All that is form, system, category, frame, or plan
tends to make things absolute and springs from a lack of inner energy, from a
sterile spiritual life. Life's great tensions verge on chaos and the madness of
exaltation. Rich spiritual life must know chaos and the effervescent paroxysm
of illness, because in them inspiration appears to be essential for creation
and contradictions become expressions of high inner temperatures. Nobody who
does not love chaos is a creator, and whoever is contemptuous of illness must
not speak of the spirit. There is value only in that which bursts forth from
inspiration, which springs up from the irrational depths of our being, from the
secret center of our subjectivity. The fruit of labor,
effort, and endeavor worthwhile noticing how the domain of esthetics narrows
gradually as it approaches serious reality and crucial life events.
Death, suffering, and sadness negate esthetics. Death and beauty are totally
opposed notions. I know nothing more disgusting than death, nothing more
serious and more sinister! How could some poets find beautiful this ultimate
negation which cannot even wear the mask of the grotesque? It is ironic that
one fears it the more one admires it. I must confess that I admire death's
negativity. It is the only thing I can admire and yet not love. Its grandeur
and infinity impress me, but my despair is so vast that I don't even harbor the
hope of death. How could I love death? One can only write
about it in contradictory ways. Whoever says that he knows something definite
about death shows that he has not even a premonition, although he bears it
within himself. Every man bears
with him not only his life but also his death. Life is just a long,
drawn-out agony.
It seems to me that
sadness partakes of this agony. The writhings of
sadness, don't they express agony? These contortions, negations of beauty,
betray so much solitude that one must ask oneself if the physiognomy of sadness
is not a mode of objectifying death in life. Sadness is a way into a mystery,
a mystery so rich that sadness never ceases to remain enigmatic. If there were
a scale for mysteries, sadness would belong to a group of infinite mysteries,
mysteries without limit, inexhaustible.
AN
OBSERVATION which, to my great regret, is always verifiable: only
those are happy who never think or, rather, who only think about life's bare
necessities, and to think about such things means not to think at all. True
thinking resembles a demon who muddies the spring of
life or a sickness which corrupts its roots. To think all the time, to raise
questions, to doubt your own destiny, to feel the weariness of living, to be
worn out to the point of exhaustion by thoughts and life, to leave behind you,
as symbols of your life's drama, a trail of smoke and blood—all this means you
are so unhappy that reflection and thinking appear as a curse causing a violent
revulsion in you. There are many things on could regret in this world in which
one shouldn't regret any thing. But I ask myself; Is
the world worthy of my regrets?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Total Dissatisfaction
Why this curse on
some of us who can never feel at ease anywhere, neither in the sun nor out of
it, neither with men nor without them? Ignorant of good humor, an amazing
achievement! Those who have no access to irresponsibility are the most
wretched. To possess a high degree of consciousness, to be always aware of yourself in relation to the world, to live in the permanent
tension of knowledge, means to be lost for life. Knowledge is the
plague of life, and consciousness, an open wound in its heart. Is it not tragic to
be man, that perpetually dissatisfied animal suspended
between life and death? I'm weary of being a man. If I could, I would renounce
my condition on the spot, but what would I become then, an animal? I cannot
retrace my steps. Besides, I might become an animal who knows the history of
philosophy. As to becoming superman, that seems to me utter and ridiculous
folly. Could there be a solution, approximate of course, in a sort of superconsciousness? Couldn't one live beyond (not just on this
side, toward animality) all complex forms of
consciousness, anxiety, agony, in a sphere of life where access to eternity
would no longer be pure myth? As far as I am concerned, I resign from humanity.
I no longer want to be, nor can still be, a man. What should I do? Work for a
social and political system, make a girl miserable? Hunt for weaknesses in
philosophical systems, fight for moral and esthetic ideals? It's all too
little. I renounce my humanity even though I may find myself alone. But am I
not already alone in this world from which I no longer expect anything? Beyond
present-day common ideals and forms, one might breathe in a superconsciousness
where the intoxication of eternity would do away with the qualms of this world,
and where being would be just as pure and immaterial as nonbeing.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Bath of Fire
There are so many
ways to achieve the sensation of immateriality that it would be difficult, if
not futile, to make a classification. Nevertheless, I think that the bath of
fire is one of the best. The bath of fire: your being
ablaze, all flashes and sparks, consumed by flames as in Hell. The bath of fire
purifies so radically that it does away with existence. Its heat waves and
scorching flames burn the kernel of life, smothering its vital elan, turning its aggressiveness into aspiration. To live
in a bath of fire, transfigured by its rich glow—such is the state of immaterial
purity where one is nothing but a dancing flame. Freed from the laws of
gravity, life becomes illusion or dream. But this is not all: at the end, a
most curious and paradoxical sensation occurs, the
feeling of dreamy unreality gives way to the sensation of becoming ash. The
bath of fire invariable ends thus: when the inner conflagration has scorched
the ground of your being, when all is ashes, what else is there left to
experience? There is both mad delight and infinite irony in the thought of my
ashes scattered to the four winds, sown frenetically in space, an eternal
reproach to the world.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Disintegration
Not everybody loses his innocence: therefore not
everybody is unhappy. Those who live naively, not out of stupidity— innocence
is a pure state which excludes such deficiencies—but out of instinctive and
organic love for nature, whose charm innocence is always quick to discover,
those are the ones who achieve harmony, an integration with life, much coveted
by those who struggle on the heights of despair. Disintegration implies total
loss of innocence, that lovely gift destroyed by knowledge, life's enemy. Rich
ground for love and enthusiasm, innocence is delight in the natural charm of
being and the unconscious experience of contradictions which no longer have a
tragic character. To attain the virginal joy of innocence, one must not live
contradictions consciously, or know tragedy and thoughts of death, because
such knowledge is baffling, complex, and requires disjunction. Innocence
resists tragedy but welcomes love, because the innocent, never troubled by
inner contradictions, have generous impulses. For the man who has cut himself
off from life, tragedy is intensely painful because contradictions arise not
only inside himself but also between him and the rest of the world. There are
only two fundamental attitudes: the naive and the heroic. All the others
partake of them. One must choose between these two in order to avoid idiocy.
But for the man who has come to make such a choice, innocence is no longer an
option, so there remains only heroism. The latter is both a privilege and a
curse for those severed from life, incapable of fulfillment and happiness. To
be a hero—in the most universal sense of the word- means to aspire to absolute
triumph. But such triumphs come only through death. Heroism means
transcending life; it is a fatal leap into nothingness, even though the hero
may not be aware that his energy springs from a life deprived of its normal
supports. All that is innocence, and does not lead to it, belongs to nothingness.
Can one speak of the seductions of nothingness? If we do, we must add that they
are much too mysterious to penetrate.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On The Reality of The Body
I can never understand why so many have called the
body an illusion, just as I will never understand how they could imagine
spirituality outside the drama of life, with all its contradictions and
shortcomings. It must be that they were never aware of the flesh, the nerves, each organ in itself. But while I do not understand this
lack of awareness, I believe it is a necessary condition for happiness. Those
still attached to life's irrationality, and still enthralled by its organic
rhythms prior to the birth of consciousness, are ignorant of the state in
which the reality of the body is ever-present to consciousness. This presence
denotes a fundamental existential illness. Is it not an illness to be
constantly aware of your nerves, your feet, your stomach, your heart, every
single part of your being? With this awareness, haven't the organs abandoned
normal functions? The reality of the body is one of the most terrible
realities. What would the spirit be without the torments of the flesh, and
consciousness without a great nervous sensibility? How could one imagine life
without the body, as a free and unconditional existence of the spirit? Only
healthy and irresponsible men who have no spirit could think this. The
spirit is the offspring of an existential illness, and Man is a sick animal. Spirit in life
is an anomaly. I have renounced so much, why should I not renounce spirit as
well? But besides being an illness of life, is not renunciation first and
foremost an illness of the spirit?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
I Do Not Know
I do not know what is
right and what is wrong; what is allowed and what is not; I cannot judge and I
cannot praise. There are no valid criteria and no consistent principles in the
world. It surprises me that some people still concern themselves with a theory
of knowledge. To tell the truth, I couldn't care less about the relativity of
knowledge, simply because the world does not deserve to be known. At times I
feel as if I had total knowledge, exhausting the content of this world; at
other times the world around me does not make any sense. Everything then has a
bitter taste, there is in me a devilish, monstrous
bitterness that renders even death insipid. I realize now for the first time
how hard it is to define this bitterness. It may be that I'm wasting my time
trying to establish a theoretical basis for it when in fact it originates in a pretheoretical zone. At this moment I do not believe in
anything and I have no hope. All forms and expressions that give life its charm
seem to me meaningless. I have no feeling either for the future or for the
past, while the present seems to me poison. I do not know whether I am
desperate or not, since lack of hope does not automatically imply despair. I
could be called anything because I stand to lose nothing. I've lost everything!
Flowers are blooming and birds are singing all around me! How distant I am from
everything!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On Individual and Cosmic Loneliness
One can experience loneliness in two ways: by feeling
lonely in the world or by feeling the loneliness of the world. Individual loneliness
is a personal drama; one can feel lonely even in the midst of great natural
beauty. An outcast in the world, indifferent to its being dazzling or dismal,
self-consumed with triumphs and failures, engrossed in inner drama—such is the
fate of the solitary. The feeling of cosmic loneliness, on the other hand,
stems not so much from man's subjective agony as from an awareness of the
world's isolation, of objective nothingness. It is as if all the splendors of
this world were to vanish at once, leaving behind the dull monotony of a
cemetery. Many are haunted by the vision of an abandoned world encased in
glacial solitude, untouched by even the pale reflections of a crepuscular
light. Who is more unhappy? He who feels his own
loneliness or he who feels the loneliness of the world? Impossible to tell,
and besides, why should I bother with a classification of loneliness? Is it not
enough that one is alone?
I leave IT in writing for
those who will come after me that I do not believe in anything and that forgetfulness
is the only salvation. I would like to forget everything, to forget myself and
to forget the world. True confessions are written with tears only. But my tears
would drown the world, as my inner fire would reduce it to ashes. I don't need
any support, encouragement, or consolation because, although I am the lowest of
men, I feel nonetheless so strong, so hard, so savage!
For I am the only man who lives without hope, the apex of
heroism and paradox. The ultimate madness! I should
channel my chaotic and unbridled passion into forgetfulness, escaping spirit
and consciousness. I too have a hope: a hope for absolute forgetfulness. But is
it hope or despair? Is it not the negation of all future hopes? I want not to
know, not to know even that I do not know. Why so many problems, arguments,
vexations? Why the consciousness of death? How much longer all this thinking
and philosophizing?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Apocalypse
How I would love one day to see all people, young and
old, sad or happy, men and women, married or not, serious or superficial leave
their homes and their work places, relinquish their duties and
responsibilities, gather in the streets and refuse to do anything anymore. At
that moment, let slaves to senseless work, who have been toiling for future
generations under the dire delusion that they contribute to the good of
humanity, avenge themselves on the mediocrity of a sterile and insignificant
life, on the tremendous waste that never permitted spiritual transfiguration.
At that moment, when all faith and resignation are lost, let the trappings of
ordinary life burst once and for all. Let those who suffer silently, not even
uttering a sigh of complaint, yell with all their might, making a strange,
menacing, dissonant clamor that would shake the earth. Let the waters flow
faster and the mountains sway threateningly, the trees show their roots like
an eternal and hideous reproach, the birds croak like ravens, and the animals
scatter in fright and fall from exhaustion. Let ideals be declared void;
beliefs, trifles; art, a lie; and philosophy, a joke. Let everything be climax
and anticlimax. Let lumps of earth leap into the air and crumble in the wind;
let plants make strange arabesques, frightful and distorted shapes, in the
sky. Let wildfires spread rapidly and a terrifying noise drown out everything
so that even the smallest animal would know that the end is near. Let all form
become formless, and chaos swallow the structure of the world in a gigantic
maelstrom. Let there be tremendous commotion and noise, terror, and explosion,
and then let there be eternal silence and total forgetfulness. And in those
final moments, let all that humanity has felt until now, hope, regret, love,
despair, and hatred, explode with such force that nothing is left behind. Would
not such moments be the triumph of nothingness and the final apotheosis of nonbeing
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Monopoly of Suffering
I ask myself; Why is it that only some people suffer? Why are only some
selected from the ranks of normal people and put on the torture rack? Some
religions maintain that God is trying us through suffering, or that we expiate
evil and unbelief through it. If such an explanation can satisfy the religious
man, it is not sufficient for anyone who notices that suffering is arbitrary
and unjust, because the innocent often suffer most. There is no valid
justification for suffering. Suffering has no hierarchy of values.
The most interesting
aspect of suffering is the sufferer's belief in its absoluteness. He believes
he has a monopoly on suffering. I think that I alone suffer, that I alone have
the right to suffer, although I also realize that there are modalities of
suffering more terrible than mine, pieces of flesh falling from the bones, the
body crumbling under one's very eyes, monstrous, criminal,
shameful sufferings. One asks oneself, How can this be, and if it be, how can
one still speak of finality and other such old wives' tales? Suffering moves
me so much that I lose all my courage. I lose heart because I do not understand
why there is suffering in the world. Its origin in life's bestiality,
irrationality, and demonism explains the presence of suffering in the
world but does not justify it. Or maybe suffering has no more justification
than life. Was life necessary? Or is its rationale purely immanent? Why should
we not reconcile ourselves to the final triumph of nonbeing, to the thought
that existence advances toward nothingness and being toward nonbeing? Isn't
nonbeing the last absolute reality? This is as challenging a paradox as that of
the world.
Although suffering
moves me and sometimes even delights me, never could I write the apologia of
suffering, because long- lasting suffering—and all genuine suffering is
long-lasting— though purifying in its first phases, unhinges the reason, dulls
the senses, and finally destroys. Facile enthusiasm for suffering is professed
only by esthetes and dilettantes of suffering, those who mistake it for
entertainment and who do not understand that there is in suffering both poison,
a formidable destructive energy, and a rich fertility, dearly paid for. To have
the monopoly of suffering is to live suspended above
the abyss. All suffering is an abyss.
THOSE WHO
MAINTAIN that suicide is an assertion of life are cowards. They invent
explanations and excuses to mask their impotence and lack of daring, for in
fact there can be no willed or rational decision to commit suicide, only
organic, secret causes which predetermine it.
Those who commit
suicide have a pathological attraction for death, which they try to resist
consciously but which they cannot totally suppress. Life in them is so
unbalanced that no rational argument could set it right. There are no rational
suicides, following to a logical conclusion a meditation on nothingness and
the futility of life. If one argues that there were wise men in antiquity who
committed suicide in solitude, I reply that they could do so only because they
had already stifled life in themselves. To meditate on death and on similar
dangerous topics is to deal life a mortal blow, for the mind contemplating so
many agonizing questions must already have been wounded. No one commits suicide
for external reasons, only because of inner disequilibrium. Under similar
adverse circumstances, some are indifferent, some are moved, some
are driven to suicide. To be obsessed with suicide, there must be such inner
agony that all self-imposed barriers break and nothing is
left but a catastrophic dizziness, a strange and powerful whirlwind. How could
suicide be an assertion of life? They say that it is caused by
disappointments, which implies that you have desired life, that you had
expectations which it did not fulfill. A false dialectic! As
if the suicide did not live before he died, did not have hopes, ambitions,
pain. Essential to suicide is the belief that you can no
longer live, not because of whim but because of a terrifying inner tragedy. Is
the inability live an assertion of life? Any suicide
is impressive. So I wonder why people still look for reasons and
justifications, why the even deprecate it. Nothing is more ridiculous than to
make a hierarchy of suicides and divide them between the noble and the vulgar.
Taking one's life is sufficiently impressive to forestall any petty hunt for
motives. I despise those who scoff at suicides committed for love, because
they do not understand that, to the lover unfulfilled love is the cancellation
of his being, a destructive plunge into meaninglessness. Unrealized passions
lead to death faster than great failures. Great failures are slow agony, but great
passions that are thwarted kill like a bolt of lightning. I admire only two
types of people: the potentially mad and the potential suicide. Only they
inspire me with awe, because only they are capable of great passions and great
spiritual transfigurations. Those who live positively, full of self-assurance,
content with their past, present, and future, have only my respect.
Why don't I
commit suicide? Because I am as sick of death as I am of life. I should be cast
into a flaming caldron! Why am I on this earth? I feel the need to cry out, to
utter a savage scream that will set the world atremble with dread. I am like a
lightning bolt ready to set the world ablaze and swallow it all in the flames
of my nothingness. I am the most monstrous being in history, the beast of the
apocalypse full of fire and darkness, of aspirations and despair. I am the
beast with a contorted grin, contracting down to illusion and dilating toward
infinity, both growing and dying, delightfully suspended between hope for
nothing and despair of everything, brought up among perfumes and poisons,
consumed with love and hatred, killed by lights and shadows. My symbol is the
death of light and the flame of death. Sparks die in me only to be reborn as
thunder and lightning. Darkness itself glows in me.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Absolute Lyricism
I would like to
explode, flow, crumble into dust, and my disintegration would be my
masterpiece. I would like to melt in the world and for the world to melt orgasmically in me and thus in our delirium to engender an apocalyptic
dream, strange and grandiose like all crepuscular visions. Let our dream bring
forth mysterious splendors and triumphant shadows, let a general conflagration
swallow the world, and let its flames generate crepuscular pleasures as
intricate as death and as fascinating as nothingness. Lyricism reaches its
ultimate form of expression only through delirium. Absolute
lyricism is the lyricism of last moments. In it, expression becomes reality, ceasing
to be a partial, minor, and unrevealing objectification. Not only your intelligence
and your sensitivity, but your entire being, your life, and your body
participate in it. Absolute lyricism is destiny which has reached absolute
self-knowledge. Such lyricism will never take an objective and separate form,
for it is your own flesh and blood. It only emerges at those crucial moments
when experience is expression. Death's only form is its experience. Thus
lyricism is a juxtaposition of act and reality, because the act is no longer a
manifestation of reality but reality itself. Absolute lyricism is beyond
poetry and sentimentalism, and closer to a metaphysics
of destiny, in general, it tends to put everything on the plane of death. All
important things bear the sign of death.
The feeling of utter confusion! Not to be able to
differentiate, clarify, understand, or appreciate! Such a feeling would make
any philosopher a poet, but not all philosophers experience it with significant
and durable intensity, for if they did, they could no longer philosophize abstractly
and rigidly. How a philosopher becomes a poet is like a drama. You fall from a
world of abstractions into a whirlwind of feelings, into all the fantastic
shapes and figures entangled in the soul. How could the actor of a complicated
drama of the soul in which, all at once, erotic anticipation clashes with
metaphysical anxiety, fear of death with desire for innocence, total
renunciation with paradoxical heroism despair with pride, forebodings of
madness with longings for anonymity, screams with silence, aspiration with
nothingness- how could he still go on philosophizing in a systematic way? There
are men who started in the world of abstract forms and ended in absolute
confusion. Therefore they can only philosophize poetically. In the state of
absolute confusion, only the delights and torments of madness still matter.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Meaning of
Grace
There are many ways to transcend our blind attachment
to life, but only through grace do we not break with its irrational
forces; it alone is a futile leap, a disinterested elan
which does not spoil life's naive charm. Grace is the joy of soaring upward.
The undulations of
graceful movements bespeak light and immaterial flight. They have the
spontaneity of wings beating in the air, of smiles, of pure young dreams. Isn't
dance grace's best form of expression? In grace, life is a flux of pure
vitality, never breaking the harmony of its own rhythms. Life becomes dream,
disinterested play, expansion contained in its own borders. Thus it creates a
pleasant illusion of freedom, spontaneous abandon, dreams wrought in sunlight.
Despair is the paroxysm of individuation, a painful and unique interiorization. Grace, on the other hand, leads to harmony
and naive fulfillment, and the graceful being never experiences feelings of
loneliness and isolation. Grace is an illusory state in which life negates its
antinomies and transcends its demonic dialectic, in which contradictions, fatality,
and the consciousness of the irrevocable temporarily vanish. Light and airy,
grace sublimates but never purifies, because it never reaches the heights of
the sublime. Ordinary experiences never carry life to heights of delirious
tension or to the edge of inner abyss, nor do they free it from that symbol of
death, the law of gravity. Grace, however, is emancipation from the law, emancipation
from subterraneous temptations, from life's demonic claws, its negative
tendencies. Transcending negativity is the essential characteristic of grace.
It is not surprising, then, that in a state of grace, life
appears more luminous, draped in sparkling rays. By
transcending all negatives and demons through harmony and lightness of being,
grace ascends to a state of wellbeing faster than religious faith, which
attains it through suffering and strife. What diversity there is in this
world, for right next to grace there is permanent fear, the torture of many. .
. .He who has not experienced absolute fear, universal anxiety, cannot understand
struggle, the madness of the flesh and of death. He who has known only grace
cannot understand the anxiety of the sick. Only sickness gives birth to serious
and deep feelings. Whatever is not born out of sickness has only an esthetic
value. To be ill means to live, willingly or not, on the heights of despair.
But such heights presuppose deep chasms, fearful precipices—to live on the
heights means to live near the abyss. One must fall in order to reach the
heights.
But grace is a state of contentment, even happiness, and
it knows neither abyss nor agony. Why are women happier than men? Is it not
because in them grace and innocence are more common than in men? They too are
affected by sickness and dissatisfaction, but grace predominates. Their naive
grace confers on them a state of superficial equilibrium, which never leads to
tragic and dangerous tensions. Women are safe on the spiritual plane because in
them the dualism between life and the spirit is less intense than in men. A
graceful sense of existence does not lead to metaphysical revelations, to a
vision of truth, to the sense of an ending which poisons every moment of life.
Women are ciphers: the more you think about them, the less you understand
them. In front of women one is silent just as one is silent in contemplation
of the world's secret essence. But where the latter is unfathomable infinity,
the former is simple mystery, in other words,
void. Not greatly disjoined from life, woman is a temporary salvation for
those on the heights of despair, because through her a return to life's
unconscious and innocent pleasures is still possible. Grace, if it has not
saved the world, has saved its women.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Vanity of Compassion
How can one still have ideals when there are so many
blind, deaf, and mad people in the world? How can I remorselessly enjoy the
light another cannot see or the sound another cannot hear? I feel like a thief
of light. Have we not stolen light from the blind and sound from the deaf?
Isn't our very lucidity responsible for the madman's darkness? When I think
about such things, I lose all courage and will, thoughts seem useless, and
compassion, vain. For I
do not feel mediocre enough to feel compassion for anyone. Compassion is
a sign of superficiality: broken destinies and unrelenting misery either make you scream or turn you to stone. Pity is not only
inefficient; it is also insulting. And besides, how can you pity another when
you yourself suffer ignominously? Compassion is as
common as it is because it does not bind you to anything! Nobody
in this world has yet died from another's suffering. And the one who
said that he died for us did not die; he was killed.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Eternity and Morality
Even today nobody can tell what is right or what is
wrong. It will be the same in the future. The relativity of such expressions
means little; not to be able to dispense with their use is more significant. I
don't know what is right and what is wrong, and yet I divide actions into good
and bad. If anyone asked me why I do so, I couldn't give an answer. I use moral
criteria instinctively; later, when I reconsider, I do not find any
justifications for having done so. Morality has become so complex and
contradictory because its values no longer constitute themselves in the
order of life but have crystallized in a transcendental region only
feebly connected to life's vital and irrational forces. How does one go about
founding a morality? I'm so sick of the word "good"; it is so stale
and vapid! Morality tells you to work for the triumph of goodness! And how? Through the fulfillment of one's duties, respect,
sacrifice. These are just empty words: in front of naked reality, moral
principles are void, so much so that one wonders whether life without them
would not be preferable. I would love a world free of forms and principles, a
world of absolute indeterminacy. I like to imagine a world of fantasy and
dream, where talk of right and wrong would no longer make sense. Since reality
is essentially irrational, why set rules, why distinguish the right from the
wrong? Morality cannot be saved; it's a mistake to believe otherwise. Yet
there are those who maintain that in this world pleasure and sin are minor
satisfactions which enjoy only a brief triumph and that only good deeds partake
of eternity. They pretend that at the end of this world's misery, goodness and
virtue will win but they have failed to see that, if eternity obliterates
superficial pleasures,
it does the same with virtue, good deeds, and moral actions. Eternity does not
lead to the triumph of either good or evil; it ravages all. It is silly to
condemn the Epicureans in the name of eternity. How is suffering rather than
pleasure going to make me immortal? From a purely objective point of view, is there any significant
difference between one man's agony and another's pleasure? Whether you suffer
or not, nothingness will swallow you forever. There is no objective road to
eternity, only a subjective feeling experienced at irregular moments in time.
Nothing created by man will endure. Why this intoxication with moral illusions
when there are other illusions even more beautiful? Those who speak of moral
salvation in the face of eternity refer to the moral action's indefinite echo
in time, its unlimited resonance. Nothing could be less true, since so-called
virtuous men are actually cowards who will disappear from the world's
consciousness faster than those who have wallowed in pleasure. And even so,
supposing the opposite were true, would a dozen or more years really count? Any
unsatisfied pleasure is a loss of life. I shall not be the one to preach
against pleasure, orgy, and excess in the name of suffering. Let the mediocre
speak of the consequences
of pleasure: are not those of suffering even greater? Only the mediocre want to
die of old age. Suffer, then, drink pleasure to its last dregs, cry or laugh,
scream in despair or with joy, sing about death or love, for nothing will
endure! Morality can only make life a long series of missed opportunities!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Moment
and Eternity
Eternity can be
understood only as subjective experience. It cannot be
conceived objectively, because man's temporal finitude prevents him from
grasping the concept of infinity as an unlimited process in time. The
experience of eternity therefore depends on intensity of subjective feeling,
and the way to eternity is to transcend the temporal. One must fight hard
against time so that—once the mirage of the succession of moments is overcome
—one can live fully the instant one is launched into eternity. How does the
instant become a gate to eternity? A sense of becoming results from the
moment's insufficiency and relativity: those with a keen consciousness of
temporality live every moment thinking of the next one. Eternity can be
attained only if there are no connections, if one lives the instant totally and
absolutely. Every experience of eternity presupposes a leap and a
transfiguration, and few and far between are those
capable of the tension necessary to arrive at the blissful contemplation of the
eternal. It is not the length but the intensity of contemplation that matters.
The return to normal will not impair the richness of this fertile experience.
On the other hand, the frequency with which such contemplations occur matters
greatly: only through frequent repetition can one experience the intoxication
of eternity, the delights of its luminous, extraterrestrial transcendence. By
isolating the moment from its successions, you confer upon it, subjectively, an
absolute value. From the point of view of eternity, time with its long train
of individual moments is, if not unreal, irrelevant.
There are no hopes or
regrets in eternity. To live each moment in itself is to escape the relativity
of taste and category, to break free from the immanence in which time has imprisoned
us. Immanent living is impossible without simultaneous living in time: without
temporality, life loses its dramatic character. The more
intense the life, the more revealing its time. Moreover, life consists
of a great number of directions, of goals and intentions which can only be
achieved in time. When speaking of life, you say moments; of eternity, moment. The experience of
eternity is void of life, a conquest of time, a victory over the moments of
life. Those with an inborn contemplative sense of eternity, uncontaminated as
we are by temporality, as for example in certain Oriental cultures, know nothing of our dramatic struggle to conquer time.
Still, the contemplation of eternity is for us a source of conquering visions
and strange delights. One cannot love eternity the way one loves a woman, one's
destiny, or one's despair, for there is in the love of eternity the attraction
of the peace of sidereal light.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
History
and Eternity
Why should I live in
history, or worry about the social and cultural problems of the age? I am
weary of culture and history; I can no longer bring myself to embrace its
torments and its aspirations. We must outstrip history, and we can do so only
when past, present, and future cease to be important, when where and when
we live becomes a matter of indifference. Am I much better off because I live
today rather than four thousand years ago in Ancient Egypt? It is silly to pity
those who lived in times we don't like, who did not know Christianity or the
discoveries of modern science. Since there is no hierarchy of life-styles,
everybody and nobody is right all at the same time. Each historical epoch is a
world in itself, closed off and certain of its principles, until the dialectic
movement of historical life creates a new, equally limited and deficient form.
I am surprised that some people study the past when the whole of history
strikes me as null and void. Of what interest are the ideals and beliefs of our
ancestors? Mankind's achievements could very well be great, but I do not care
to know them. I take greater comfort in the contemplation of eternity. In this
world not worth so much as a breath, the only valid relation is that between
man and eternity, not between man and history. No one negates history out of a
passing whim, but only under the impact of harrowing and unsuspected tragedies.
Such negations spring from great sadness, not from merely abstract meditations
on history. Now that I no longer want to take part in history and I negate the
past of humanity, a deadly sadness, painful beyond imagination, preys upon me.
Has it been long dormant and just now awakened by these thoughts? There is in
me the bitter taste of
death, and nothingness is burning within me like a strong poison. How could I
still speak of beauty, and make esthetic remarks, when I am so sad, sad unto
death?
I do not want to know
anything more. By outstripping history, one acquires superconsciousness,
an important ingredient of eternity. It takes you into the realm where
contradictions and doubts lose their meaning, where you forget about life and
death. It is the fear of death that launches men on their quest for eternity:
its only advantage is forgetfulness. But what about the return
from eternity?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Not to Be a Man Anymore
I am more and more persuaded that man is an unhappy
animal, abandoned and forced to find his own way in life. Nature has never
known anything like him. He suffers a thousandfold
more from his so-called freedom than from his imprisonment in natural
existence. Not surprisingly, he often longs to be a flower or some other plant.
When you come to a point where you want to live like a plant, fully
unconscious, then you have come to despair of humanity. But why shouldn't I
exchange places with a flower? I already know what it means to be man, to live
in history, have ideals: what else is in it for me? To be a man is, of course,
a great thing! But it is mainly a tragedy because to be human means to live in
a totally different way, more complex and more dramatic than natural existence.
Life's tragic character gradually disappears as you go down the scale toward
the inanimate realm. Man tends to monopolize tragedy and suffering in the
world: that's why salvation for him is a burning insoluble question. I am not
proud to be a man, because I know only too well what it is to be man. Only
those who have not experienced this state intensely are proud of it, because
they intend to become men. Their delight is natural: there are among men some
who are not far above plants or animals, and therefore aspire to humanity. But
those who know what it means to be Man long to be anything but. If I could, I
would choose every day another form, plant or animal, I would be all flowers
one by one: weed, thistle, or rose; a tropical tree with a tangle of branches,
seaweed cast by the shore, or mountain whipped by winds; bird of prey, a croaking
bird, or a bird with melodious song; beast of the forest or tame animal. Let me
live the life of every species, wildly and un- self-consciously, let me try out
the entire spectrum of nature, let me change
gracefully, discreetly, as if it were the most natural procedure. How I would
search the nests and caves, wander the deserted mountains and the sea, the
hills and the plains! Only a cosmic adventure of this kind, a series of
metamorphoses in the plant and animal realms, would reawaken in me the desire
to become Man again. If the difference between Man and animal lies in the fact
that the animal can only be an animal whereas man can also be not-man—that is,
something other than himself-then I am not-man.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Magic
and Fatality
It is hard for me to imagine the joy of people with
magical sensitivity, those people who feel that
everything is within their power, for whom there are no obstacles. Magical
sensitivity leads only to joy; it knows nothing of the irrevocability and
fatality of existence. To feel that you can do anything, that you can hold the
absolute in the palm of your hand, that your exuberance is one with the
world's, that you are the world, and that its heart beats in you
frenetically—these are the ingredients of an unimaginable joy, the exclusive
monopoly of those possessed of magical sensitivity. Magic knows nothing of
illnesses, or if it does, they are never incurable ones. Magical optimism finds
equivalences in everything. Magic rejects the negative, demonic essence of
life. He who has this kind of sensitivity cannot understand the triumphs of
pain, misery, destiny, death. The illusions of magic negate the irrevocable,
reject the inevitability and universality of death. Subjectively, magic is very
important because it leads to a state of euphoric exaltation. In it, man lives
as if he were never to die. The question of death consists of nothing but the
subjective consciousness of death. For those who do not have it, it is totally
irrelevant that, through death, they will fall into nothingness. We reach the
climax of consciousness through incessant contemplation of death.
Infinitely more complex are those who are conscious of
fatality, for whom the insoluble and the irrevocable
are real, who feel that effort is vain, and regret, impossible. Essential
reality unfolds under the sign of fatality, life's inability to overcome its
limited condition. Magic is useful for small and inessential things, but powerless when
confronted with metaphysical reality, which requires, most of the time,
silence, something magical sensitivity is incapable of. To live with an acute
consciousness of fatality, of one's own impotence in the face of life's great
problems, which you cannot even pose without tragically implicating yourself in
existence, means to engage directly the capital question of life, that of
inaccessible and unknowable infinity.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Unimaginable Joy
You pretend that
despair and agony are only preliminaries, that ideally one should overcome
them if one is not to become an automaton. You think joy is the only means of
salvation and you despise all others? You call the obsession with agony
selfishness and find generous impulses only in joy? You offer us this joy; but how can we
receive it from the outside? As long as it does not spring from our inner
resources, help from the outside is quite useless. How easy it is to recommend
joy to those who cannot be joyful! How can one haunted by madness be joyful? Do
all those who are so eager to promote joy realize what it means to feel and
fear madness closing in, to live all your life with the tormenting presentiment
of madness, to which is added the even more persistent and certain
consciousness of death? Joy may very well be a state of bliss, but it can only
be reached naturally. There may be an end to our agony, and we may still be
destined to attain peaceful and serene bliss. Should the gates of Eden be
closed to me forever? I have not yet found their key.
Since we cannot be
joyful, there only remains the road of agony, of mad exaltation. Let us live
the agony fully; let us live our inner tragedy absolutely and frenetically to
the very end! All we have left is paroxysm, and when it subsides, there will be
just one wisp of smoke . . . our inner fire will ravish all. Pure and generous,
in no need of praise or justification, joy is unwarranted in the face of
despair. It does not do anything for the organically desperate while for others
it is so seductive that it needs no excuses. The complexity of absolute
despair is infinitely greater than that of absolute joy. Is it for this reason
that the gates of Eden are forbidden to those who have lost hope?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Ambiguity of Suffering
There is no one who, after
having endured pain or sickness, does not experience the slightest, vaguest
twinge of regret. Although longing to recover, those who suffer intensely for a
long time sense an irreparable loss in their improvement. If pain is part of
your being, overcoming it is like a loss and causes a pang of regret. I owe to
suffering the best parts of myself as well as all that I have lost in life.
Therefore I cannot either curse or love suffering. My feeling for it is hard to
describe; it is strange, elusive and has the mysterious charm of twilight.
Beatitude through suffering is an illusion, since it requires a reconciliation to the fatality of pain in order to avoid
total annihilation. Life's last resources smolder under this illusion. The only
concession to suffering hides in our regret of potential recovery, but it is so
vague and elusive a feeling that it cannot stamp itself on anyone's
consciousness. All disappearing pains carry with them this vague discomfort,
as if the return to equilibrium forbade the path to alluring yet tormenting
realms from which one cannot part without a final backward glance. Since
suffering has not revealed Beauty to us, what lights still attract our eye? Are
we drawn by the gloom of suffering?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
All Is Dust
There are so many reasons to reject life that it would
be impossible to enumerate them all: despair, death, and infinity are only the
most obvious. But there are also an equal number of inner, subjective causes,
for, where life is concerned, there is no true or false, only our spontaneous
reactions. One might call it subjectivism. What does it matter? Isn't intense
subjectivity the way to attain universality, exactly as one enters eternity
through the instant? Men value solitude so little! They condemn the sterility
of all that it has produced and give praise exclusively to social values, for
they cherish the illusion that they have all contributed to their creation.
They all aspire to great achievements through which they hope to attain
immortality. As if they will not crumble into dust!
I AM
DISPLEASED with everything. If they made me God, I would
immediately resign, and if the world were just me, I would sunder myself
apart, burst into tiny pieces, and disappear. How can there be moments when I
feel as if I understand it all?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Enthusiasm as a Form of Love
There are pure,
limpid forms of life undisclosed to those living under the sign of despair.
Those whose life flows without obstacles reach a stage of delightful contentment
in which the world appears charming and full of light. Enthusiasm casts a
bewitching light over the world; it is a specific form of love, a way of forgetting
oneself. Love has so many faces, so many aspects, and so many deviations that
it is hard to find a typical form for it. Any science of love will look first
for love's original manifestation. As one speaks of love between the sexes,
love of God, for nature or for art, one can also speak of enthusiasm as a form
of love. Which form is the essential one from which all others derive? Theologians
maintain that it is the love of God and that all other manifestations are but
pale reflections of this fundamental love. Pantheists with esthetic tendencies
believe that it is the love of nature, and pure esthetes, the love of art.
Similarly, for biologists it is pure sexuality without affection and for
metaphysicians it is the feeling of universal identity. Yet not one of them
will be able to prove that the form he defends is the most typical, because in
the course of history that form has varied so much that nobody today could
define it with any certainty.
As for me, I believe
that the quintessential form of love is that between a man and a woman, not
only sexuality but a rich network of affective states. Has anyone ever
committed suicide in the name of God, nature, or art? Love grows in intensity
when it fastens on the concrete; one loves a woman for what makes her
different, unique in the world: nothing can replace her at the height of
passion. All other forms of love, though tending toward autonomy, participate
in this essential form. Thus one generally does not place enthusiasm in the
realm of love, when in fact its roots penetrate deep into the very substance of
love, its emancipating tendencies notwithstanding. There is in the
enthusiastic man a universal receptivity, an ability to gather everything with
a surplus of energy which spends itself just for the pleasure of acting. The
enthusiast heeds no criteria, makes no calculations; he is all abandon,
restlessness, and devotion. The joy of achieving and the ecstasy of efficiency
are the essential characteristics of the man for whom life is a leap toward
heights where destructive forces lose their negative intensity. We all have
moments of enthusiasm, but they are too rare to stamp us permanently. I am
referring to people in whom enthusiasm is predominant and constitutes the
essential mark of their personality. They do not know defeat, because it is not
the goal but the initiative and pleasure of acting that attracts them; they
throw themselves into action not because they have meditated upon its
consequences but simply because they cannot help it. Although not altogether impervious
to success, the enthusiast is neither stimulated by it nor defeated by its
absence. He is the last one to fail in this world. Life is more mediocre and
fragmentary than we think: isn't this the reason for our decline, the loss of
our vivacity, the hardening of our inner rhythms, the gradual slowing down of
our vital flow? This process of waste destroys our receptivity and our
willingness to embrace life generously and enthusiastically. The enthusiast
alone preserves his energy until old age; all others, if not already born dead
like most people, die before their time. How rare the true enthusiast! Can we
imagine a world in which everybody will love everything, a world of
enthusiasts? Such an image is even more alluring than the image of paradise,
because its excesses of generosity surpass any of those in Eden. The enthusiast's
ability to be constantly reborn raises him above life's demoniacal temptations,
the fear of nothingness, and the torments of agony. His life has no tragic
dimension, because enthusiasm is the only form of life totally opaque to death.
Even grace—so similar to enthusiasm—has less of this irrational ignorance of
death. Grace is full of melancholy charm; not so enthusiasm. My tremendous
admiration for enthusiasts stems from my inability to
comprehend how there can be such men in a world where death, nothingness,
sadness, and despair keep sinister company. It makes one wonder, to see people
who are never desperate. How can the enthusiast be indifferent to success? How
can he act by virtue of excess only? What kind of strange and paradoxical form
does love take in enthusiasm? The more intense love is, the more
individualized. Men who love truly and passionately cannot love several women
at once: the more intense the love, the more important its object. Let us
imagine a passionate love without an object, a man without the woman on whom to
concentrate his love: what would it be but the plenitude of love? Are there men
with a great potential for love but who have never loved in this primordial,
original way? Enthusiasm is love with an unspecified object. Instead of
orienting itself toward others, enthusiastic love expends itself lavishly in
generous actions, with a sort of universal receptivity.
Enthusiasm is a
superior child of Eros. Of all the forms of love, enthusiasm is the most free
of sexuality, much more so than mystic love, which cannot shed its sexual
symbolism. Thus enthusiasm is spared the anxiety which makes sexuality play an
important part in the human tragedy. The enthusiast is preeminently an
unproblematic person. He understands many things without ever knowing the
agonizing doubts and the chaotic sensitivity of the problematic man. The
latter cannot solve anything, because nothing satisfies him. You will find in
him neither the enthusiast's gift of abandon, his naive
irrationality, nor the charming paradox of love in its purest state. The
biblical myth of knowledge as sin is the most profound myth ever invented. The
enthusiast's euphoria is due to the fact that he is unaware of the tragedy of
knowledge. Why not say it? True knowledge is the most tenebrous
darkness. I would gladly exchange all the harrowing problems of this world for
sweet, un-self-conscious naivete. The spirit does
not elevate; it tears you apart. In enthusiasm, as in grace and magic, the
spirit does not oppose life. The secret of happiness lies in this original nondivision of an impenetrable unity. If you are an
enthusiast, you do not know that poison, duality. Life usually preserves its
fecundity and productiveness through the tensions and oppositions of agnostic
struggle. Enthusiasm overcomes it, and accedes to a life without tragedy and a
love without sexuality.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Light and Darkness
The falsity of all
philosophical and historical systems is best illustrated by the erroneous
interpretation of the dualism of light and darkness in Oriental and mystical
religions. Thus some have claimed that men, having noticed the regular
alternation of day and night, equated the former with life and the latter with
mystery and death, raised light and darkness to the rank of metaphysical principles.
This interpretation is natural but, like all external explications,
insufficient. The question of light and darkness is linked to the question of
ecstasy. Their dualism acquires an explanatory value only for one who,
successively enslaved by the forces of light and darkness, has known both
obsession and captivity. Ecstasy mingles shadows and sparks in a weird dance;
it weaves a dramatic vision of fugitive glimmers in mysterious obscurity,
playing with all the nuances of light through total darkness. Nevertheless,
this gorgeous display is not as important as the mere fact that it holds and
fascinates you. The height of ecstasy is the final sensation, in which you feel
you are dying because of all this light and darkness. Especially weird is the fact
that ecstasy wipes out surrounding objects, familiar forms of the world, until
ail that is left is a monumental projection of shadow and light. It is hard to
explain how this selection and purification takes place, why these immaterial
shadows hold such sway over us. Demonism is inherent in any ecstatic exaltation.
How can we help attributing an absolute character to light and darkness when
they are all that is left of the world's ecstasy? The frequency
with which ecstasy occurs in Oriental religions, as well as in other forms of
mysticism at all times, proves the rightness of our
hypothesis. The absolute is inside oneself, not outside, and ecstasy, this
paroxysm of interiority, reveals only inner shadows and glimmers of light. Next
to them, the charm of light and day fades quickly. Ecstasy partakes of essence
to such an extent that it gives an impression of metaphysical hallucination.
Pure essences, grasped through ecstasy, are immaterial, but their immateriality
causes vertigo and obsession from which you cannot free yourself except by
converting them into metaphysical principles.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Renunciation
So you witnessed old
age, pain, and death and told yourself that pleasure is an illusion and that
the pleasure seekers do not understand the inconstancy of things. Then you
shunned the world, persuaded that nothing will endure. "I will not
return," you proclaimed, "before I have escaped birth, old age, and
death." There is much pride and suffering in every renunciation. Instead
of retreating discreetly, without a big show of revolt and hatred, you
denounce, emphatically and haughtily, others' ignorance and illusions; you
condemn their pleasures. The ascetics, who renounced life and fled into the
desert, were convinced that they had overcome all human weaknesses. The belief
that they had access to a subjective eternity gave them the illusion of total
liberation. Nonetheless, their condemnation of pleasure and their contempt for
humanity betray their inability to actually free themselves. Were I to withdraw into the most fearsome desert, renounce
everything, and live in absolute solitude, still I would never dream of
despising men and their pleasure. Since I cannot
really enter eternity through renunciation and solitude, since I shall die like
the rest, why despise them, why call my way the only true one? All the great
prophets lack discretion and human understanding. I witness pain, old age,
death, and I know that they cannot be overcome; but why should I spoil
another's enjoyment with my knowledge? Suffering and the consciousness of its
inescapability lead to renunciation; yet nothing would induce me, not even if I
were to become a leper, to condemn another's joy. There is much envy in every
act of condemnation. Buddhism and Christianity are the revenge and the spite of
those who suffer.
Were I in the throes
of agony, I would still praise and celebrate orgy. I do not recommend
renunciation, because only a few can overcome the thought of life's
inconstancy. In society, as much as in the wilderness, inconstancy will
preserve its bitter flavor. Just think how much greater were the illusions of
great solitaries than those of the innocent and the naive!
The
thought of renunciation is so bitter that it is hard to imagine how man ever
came to conceive of it. He who in a moment of despair has not experienced a
cold shiver, a sensation of ineluctable abandonment, cosmic death, and
individual nothingness, has not experienced the terrifying preliminaries of renunciation.
Renounce?
But how? Where should you go in order not to renounce
it all at once although that is the only genuine renunciation? Actual deserts
are not readily available to us in our lands and our climate; we lack the
adequate milieu. Not living under the fierce desert sun, with
just that one thought about eternity, are we to become saints with roofs
over our heads? Not to be able to renounce except through suicide is a strictly
modern drama. Were our inner desert to materialize, wouldn't its immensity
crush us?
WHY
NOT EXPLODE? Isn't there enough energy in me to shake the world, enough madness
to do away with light? Isn't chaos my only joy, and isn't the elan which will cause my downfall my only pleasure? Are not
my flights falls, and is not my explosion my love? Can I only love through
self-destruction? Could it be that I am totally forbidden knowledge of the pure
states? Can there be so much poison in my love? Have I not fought death long
enough? Should Eros also be my enemy? Why is it that, when love is reborn in
me, I become so afraid that I am ready to swallow the entire world in order to
stop my love from growing? My predicament: I want to be disappointed in love so
that I will have more reasons to suffer. Only love reveals to you your true
degradation. Can the man who has looked death in the face still love? Can he
still die of love?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Blessings of Insomnia
Just as ecstasy purifies you of the particular and the
contingent, leaving nothing except light and darkness, so insomnia kills off
the multiplicity and diversity of the world, leaving you prey to your private
obsessions. What strangely enchanted tunes gush forth during those sleepless
nights! Their flowing tones are bewitching, but there is a note of regret in
this melodic surge which keeps it short of ecstasy. What kind of regret? It is
hard to say, because insomnia is so complex that one cannot tell what the loss
is. Or maybe the loss is infinite. During wakeful nights, the presence of a
single thought, or feeling, reigns supreme. It becomes the source of the
night's mysterious music. Thus transformed, the thoughts of wakeful nights are
mild enough to stir depths of universal anxiety in man's soul. Death itself,
although still hideous, acquires in the night a sort of impalpable
transparency, an illusory and musical character. Nevertheless, the sadness of
this universal night is like the sadness of Oriental music, in which the
mystery of death is more dominant than that of love.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On
the Transubstantiation of Love
Irrationality presides over the birth of love. The sensation
of melting is also present, for love is a form of intimate communion and
nothing expresses it better than the subjective impression of melting, the
falling away of all barriers of individuation. Isn't love specificity and
universality all at once? True communion can only be achieved through an
individual. I love someone, but since she is the symbol of everything, I
partake of the essence of everything, unconsciously and naively. Love's
universality presupposes the specificity of the object of love; the individual
is a window on the universal. Exaltation in love arises from the growth of
love's irrationality to a climax of intensity. All true love is a peak which
sexuality cannot dwarf.
Sexuality too has its unique peaks. However, although
one cannot conceive of love without sexuality, the strange phenomenon we call
love displaces sexuality from the center of our consciousness. Obsessively
purified, the beloved acquires an aura of both transcendence and intimacy which
makes sexuality marginal, if not in fact, at least subjectively. There is no
spiritual love between the sexes, only a transfiguration of the flesh through
which the beloved identifies herself so much with her lover that she creates an
illusion of spirituality. Only then does the sensation of melting occur: the
flesh trembles in a supreme spasm, ceases resistance,
burning with inner fires, melting and flowing, unstoppable lava.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Man,
the Insomniac Animal
Whoever said that sleep is the
equivalent of hope had a penetrating intuition of the frightening importance
not only of sleep but also of insomnia! The importance of insomnia is so
colossal that I am tempted to define man as the animal who cannot sleep. Why
call him a rational animal when other animals are equally reasonable? But there
is not another animal in the entire creation that wants
to sleep yet cannot. Sleep is forgetfulness: life's drama, its complications
and obsessions vanish completely, and every awakening is a new beginning, a new
hope. Life thus maintains a pleasant discontinuity, the illusion of permanent
regeneration. Insomnia, on the other hand, gives birth to a feeling of irrevocable
sadness, despair, and agony. The healthy man—the animal —only dabbles in insomnia: he knows nothing of those who would
give a kingdom for an hour of unconscious sleep, those as terrified by the
sight of a bed as they would be of a torture rack. There is a close link
between insomnia and despair. The loss of hope comes with the loss of sleep.
The difference between paradise and hell: you can always sleep in paradise,
never in hell. God punished man by taking away sleep and giving him knowledge.
Isn't deprivation of sleep one of the most cruel
tortures practiced in prisons? Madmen suffer a lot from insomnia; hence their
depressions, their disgust with life, and their suicidal impulses. Isn't the
sensation, typical of wakeful hallucinations, of diving into an abyss, a form
of madness? Those who commit suicide by throwing themselves from bridges into
rivers or from high rooftops onto pavements must be motivated by a blind desire
to fall and the dizzying attraction of abysmal depths.
MY SOUL is chaos, how can it be at all? There is everything in me: search and you will
find out. I am a fossil dating from the beginning of the world: not all of its
elements have completely crystallized, and initial chaos still shows through.
I am absolute contradiction, climax of antinomies, the last limit of tension;
in me anything is possible, for I am he who at the supreme moment, in front of
absolute nothingness, will laugh.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Truth,
What a Word!
The
idea of liberation through the suppression of desire is the greatest
foolishness ever conceived by the human mind. Why cut life short, why destroy
it for so little profit as total indifference and the illusion of freedom? How
dare you speak of life after you have stifled it in yourself? I have more
respect for the man with thwarted desires, unhappy and desperate in love, than
for the cold and proud philosopher. A world full of philosophers, what a
terrifying prospect! They should be all wiped out so that life could go on
naturally—blindly and irrationally.
I
hate the wisdom of these men unmoved by truths, who do not suffer with their
nerves, their flesh, and their blood. I like only vital, organic truths, the offspring
of our anxiety. Those whose thoughts are alive are always right; there are no
arguments against them. And even if there were, they would not last long. I
wonder how there can still be men searching for the truth. Do
wise men not yet understand that truth cannot
be?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Beauty of Flames
The beauty of flames lies in their strange play,
beyond all proportion and harmony. Their diaphanous flare symbolizes at once
grace and tragedy, innocence and despair, sadness and voluptuousness. Their
burning transparence has something of the lightness of great purifications. I
wish the fiery transcendence would carry me up and throw me into a sea of
flames, where, consumed by their delicate and insidious tongues, I would die an
ecstatic death. The beauty of flames creates the illusion of a pure, sublime
death similar to the light of dawn. Immaterial, death in flames is like a
burning of light, graceful wings. Do only butterflies die in flames? What
about those devoured by the flames within them?
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Paucity of Wisdom
I
hate wise men because they are lazy, cowardly, and prudent. To the
philosophers' equanimity, which makes them indifferent to both pleasure and
pain, I prefer devouring passions. The sage knows neither the tragedy of
passion, nor the fear of death, nor risk and enthusiasm, nor barbaric,
grotesque, or sublime heroism. He talks in proverbs and gives advice. He does
not live, feel, desire, wait for anything. He levels
down all the incongruities of life and then suffers the consequences. So much
more complex is the man who suffers from limitless anxiety. The wise man's life
is empty and sterile, for it is free from contradiction and despair. An
existence full of irreconcilable contradictions is so much richer and creative.
The wise man's resignation springs from inner void, not inner fire. I would
rather die of fire than of void.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Return to Chaos
Let us return to original
chaos! Let us imagine the primordial din, the original vortex! Let us throw ourselves
into the whirlwind which has preceded the creation of form. Let our being
tremble with effort and madness in the fiery abyss! Let everything be wiped out
so that, surrounded by confusion and disequilibrium, we participate fully in
the general delirium, retracing our way back from cosmos to chaos, from form to
swirling gyres. The disintegration of the world is creation in reverse: an
apocalypse upside down but sprung from similar impulses. Nobody desires to
return to chaos without having first experienced an apocalyptic vertigo.
How great my terror and my joy
at the thought of being dragged into the vortex of initial chaos, that
pandemonium of paradoxical symmetry—the unique geometry of chaos, devoid of
sense or form!
In every whirlwind hides a potential
for form, just as in chaos there is a potential cosmos. Let me possess an
infinite number of unrealized, potential forms! Let everything vibrate in me
with the universal anxiety of the beginning, just awakening from nothingness!
I can only live at the
beginning or the end of this world.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Irony
and Self-Irony
Once you've negated everything and done away
completely with all forms of existence, once nothing can survive in the path of
your negativity, who can you turn to, laughing or crying, if not your own self?
Once you have witnessed the fall of the entire world, there is nothing left but
for you to fall too. The infinite character of irony cancels all of life's
contents. I'm not speaking here of elegant, refined irony, born of a sense of
superficial pride and superiority—the irony some use to show off their detachment
from the world—but of the tragic, bitter irony of despair. Genuine irony
replaces tears, convulsions, or even a grotesque and criminal grin. There is a
great difference between the irony of sufferers and that of lazy, superficial
people. That of the former is the sign of a chronic inability to live
innocently, connected with a sense of the loss of vital forces, whereas that of
the latter knows nothing of this irrevocable loss and does not reflect it in
consciousness. Irony betrays an inner convulsion, a deepening of wrinkles, the
absence of spontaneous love, of human communion and understanding. It is a
veiled contempt, despising naive, spontaneous gestures, because it is beyond
the irrational and the naive. Nonetheless, this irony is envious of naive
people. Enormously proud and therefore unable to show openly his admiration
for simplicity, the ironic man, envious and poisonous, shrinks with spite. This
bitter, tragic irony seems to me more genuine than lighthearted, skeptical
irony. The fact that selfirony is
always tragic and agonic is quite revealing. Self-irony is made up of
sighs, not of smiles, even though its sighs are stifled. Self-irony is an
expression of despair. You've lost the world; you've lost yourself. Henceforth a
sinister, poisonous burst of laughter haunts your actions at every step, and
above the ruins of smiling innocence rises the hideous
ghost of an agonic grin, more contorted than those of primitive masks and more
rigid than those on Egyptian statues.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
On
Poverty
Persuaded that poverty is the
human lot, I can no longer believe in any doctrine of reform. All such
doctrines are equally stupid and futile. There is no poverty among animals,
because they live on their own, ignorant of hierarchy and exploitation. This
phenomenon is exclusively human, for man alone made his equals his slaves. Man
alone is capable of so much self-contempt.
All the charitable endeavors in
this world only manage to bring poverty into greater relief; they show it to be
more terrible and unintelligible than utter dereliction. Poverty, like ruins,
hurts by an absence of humanity and makes one regret
that men are unwilling to change that which is well within their power to
change. Knowing full well that men could abolish poverty, you are nevertheless
aware of its eternity and you feel a bitter anxiety in which man appears in all
his petty inconsequence. Poverty in social life is only a pale reflection of
man's infinite inner poverty. Whenever I think of poverty, I lose my desire to
live. I should throw away my pen and move into the slums, where I could relieve
poverty better and more efficiently than with a poisonous book. Whenever I
think of man's abject poverty, his rot, his spreading gangrene, I am gripped by
mortal despair. Instead of constructing theories and ideologies to deal with
poverty, man, this rational animal, should simply give the coat off his back in
a gesture of fraternal understanding. Poverty in the world compromises man more
than anything else and will no doubt bring about the downfall of such a
megalomaniac animal. In front of poverty, I'm even ashamed of music. The essence of social life is in justice. How, then,
should one support any social or political doctrine?
Poverty destroys everything in
life; it makes it ghastly, disgusting. Alongside aristocratic paleness there
is the paleness of poverty: the former, a consequence of refinement, the
latter, of mummification, for poverty turns you into a ghost, makes shadows out
of life, twilight creatures like survivors of a cosmic holocaust. The
convulsions of poverty bear no trace of purification; they are all hatred,
bitterness, and flesh gone evil. Poverty does not engender a pure, angelic soul
or an immaculate humility any more than sickness does; its humility is
venomous, evil, and vengeful.
There cannot be a relative rebellion in the face of injustice. There can
only be eternal rebellion, because human poverty is eternal.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Flight From the Cross
I do not like prophets any more
than I like fanatics who have never doubted their mission. I measure prophets'
value by their ability to doubt, the frequency of their moments of lucidity.
Doubt makes them truly human, but their doubt is more
impressive than that of ordinary people. Everything else in them is nothing
but absolutism, preaching, moral didacticism. They
want to teach others, bring them salvation, show them the truth, change their destinies, as if their truths were better than
those of the others. Only doubt can distinguish prophets from maniacs. But
isn't it too late for them to doubt? The one who thought he was the son of God
only doubted at the last moment. Christ really doubted not on the mountain but
on the cross. I am convinced that on the cross Jesus envied the destiny of
anonymous men and, had he been able to, would have retreated to the most obscure
corner of the world, where no one would have begged him for hope or salvation.
I can imagine him alone with the Roman soldiers, imploring them to take him off
the cross, pull out the nails, and let him escape to where the echo of human
suffering would no longer reach him. Not because he would suddenly have ceased
to believe in his mission—he was too enlightened to be a skeptic—but because
death for others is harder to bear than
one's own death. Jesus suffered crucifixion because he knew that his ideas
could triumph only through his own sacrifice.
People say: for us to believe
in you, you must renounce everything that is yours and also yourself. They
want your death as a warranty for the authenticity
of your beliefs. Why do they admire works written in blood? Because such works
spare them any suffering while at the same time preserving the illusion of
suffering. They want to see the blood and tears behind your lines. The crowd's
admiration is sadistic.
Had Jesus not died on the cross, Christianity would
not have triumphed. Mortals doubt everything except death. Christ's death was
for them the ultimate proof of the validity of Christian principles. Jesus
could have easily escaped crucifixion or could have given in to the Devil! He
who has not made a pact with the Devil should not live, because the Devil
symbolizes life better than God. If I have any regrets, it is that the Devil
has rarely tempted me . . . but then neither has God loved me. Christians have
not yet understood that God is farther removed from them than they are from
Him. I can very well imagine God being bored with men who only know how to beg,
exasperated by the triviality of his creation, equally disgusted with both
heaven and earth. And I see him taking flight into nothingness, like Jesus escaping
from the cross. . . . What would have happened if the Roman soldiers had
listened to Jesus' plea, had taken him off the cross and let him escape? He would
certainly not have gone to some other part of the world to preach but only to
die, alone, without people's sympathy and tears. And even supposing that,
because of his pride, he did not beg for freedom, I find it difficult to
believe that this thought did not obsess him. He must have truly believed that
he was the son of God. His belief notwithstanding, he could not have helped
doubting or being gripped by the fear of death at the moment of his supreme
sacrifice. On the cross, Jesus had moments when, if he did not doubt that he
was the son of God, he regretted it. He accepted
death uniquely so that his ideas would triumph.
It may very well be that Jesus was simpler than I
imagine him, that he had fewer doubts and fewer regrets, for he doubted his
divine origin only at his death. We, on the other hand, have so many doubts and
regrets that not one among us would dare dream that he is the son of a god. I
hate Jesus for his preachings, his morality, his
ideas, and his faith. I love him for his moments of doubt and regret, the only
truly tragic ones in his life, though neither the most interesting nor the
most painful, for if we had to judge from their suffering, how many before him
would also be entitled to call themselves sons of God!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Cult of Infinity
I cannot speak of infinity without experiencing a
double vertigo, both external and internal—as if, suddenly abandoning a well-
ordered existence, I threw myself into a whirlwind and began to move through
space at the speed of thought. My trajectory tends toward an eternal and
inaccessible point. The farther this point moves into inconceivable distance,
the faster the giddy gyrations of the whirlwind. Neither bright nor graceful,
they have the intricate pattern of cosmic flames. The world is shaking and trembling,
spinning at an infernally maddening speed as if the apocalypse were
approaching. One cannot grasp the meaning of infinity without experiencing this
strange vertiginous feeling of the End. This is the paradox of infinity: it
makes the sensation of the end more real while at the same time making it ever
more impossible, for infinity, both in time and space, leads to nothing. How
can we accomplish anything in the future when we have behind us an eternity in
which nothing was accomplished? If the world had had any meaning, it would have
been revealed to us by now and we would know it. How can I continue to believe
that it will be disclosed in the future when it has not been made manifest yet?
But the world has no meaning; irrational at the core, it is, moreover,
infinite. Meaning is conceivable only in a finite world, where one can reach something,
where there are limits to stop our regression, clear points of reference, where
history moves toward a goal envisioned by the theory of progress. Infinity leads
to nothing, for it is totally provisional. "Everything" is too little
when compared to infinity. Nobody can have the experience of infinity without
spells of dizziness, a profound and unforgettable anxiety. How
can one help being anxious when all is equally infinite?
Infinity renders impossible any
solution to the problem of meaning. It gives me demonic pleasure to think that
the world lacks meaning because of infinity. What's the use of
"meaning," after all? Can't we live without it? Universal meaninglessness
gives way to ecstatic inebriation, an orgy of irrationality. Since the world
has no meaning, let us live! Without definite aims or accessible ideals, let us
throw ourselves into the roaring whirlwind of infinity, follow its tortuous
path in space, burn in its flames, love its cosmic
madness and total anarchy! One must bear within oneself the germs of this
cosmic anarchy in order to grasp its meaning. To live infinity, as well as to
meditate a long time upon it, is the most terrifying lesson in anarchy and
revolt one can ever learn. Infinity shakes you to the roots of your being,
disorganizes you, but it also makes you forget the petty, the contingent, and
the insignificant.
How fortunate that, having lost
all our hopes, we can still leap into infinity, dive into boundlessness,
participate in the universal anarchy of its whirlwind! What happiness to be
carried away by the madness of this incessant movement and to think less of our
death than of our insanity, to fulfill a dream of cosmic barbarity and
boundless exaltation! Let our falling out of this whirlwind not mean gradual
extinction, but sustain our agony in the chaos of the original maelstrom. Let
the pathos and drama of infinity come to us once more in the loneliness of
death so that our passing away into nothingness will resemble an illumination
amplifying the mystery and the meaninglessness of this world.
One of the principal elements
of infinity is its negation of form.
Absolute becoming, infinity destroys anything that is formed, crystallized, or
finished. Isn't music the art which best expresses infinity because it
dissolves all forms into a charmingly ineffable fluidity? Form always tends to
complete what is fragmentary and, by individualizing its contents, to
eliminate the perspective of the universal and the infinite; thus it exists
only to remove the content of life from chaos and anarchy. Forms are illusory
and, beyond their evanescence, true reality reveals itself as an intense pulsation. The penchant for form comes from
love of finitude, the seduction of boundaries which will never engender
metaphysical revelations. Metaphysics, like music, springs from the experience
of infinity. They both grow on heights and cause vertigo. I have always
wondered why those who have produced masterpieces in these domains have not all
gone mad. Music more than any other art requires so much
concentration that one could easily, after creative moments, lose one's mind.
All great composers ought to either commit suicide or become insane at the
height of their creative powers. Are not all those aspiring to infinity on the
road to madness? Normality, abnormality, are notions
that no longer mean anything. Let us live in the ecstasy of infinity, let us
love that which is boundless, let us destroy forms and institute the only cult
without forms: the cult of infinity.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Transfiguration
of Banality
Since
I will not die right away, nor regain my innocence, going through the same
routine motions every day is sheer madness. Banality must be overcome at all costs
and the way cleared for transfiguration. How sad to see men bypass themselves,
neglect their own destiny instead of rekindling the light they carry within
them or getting drunk on their abysmal darkness! Why not wrench from suffering
all that it can yield, why not tend a smile until we have reached all the way
back to its vital springs? We all have hands, yet no one thinks of using them
to convey absolute expression through their delicate movements. We admire hands
in paintings, we love to talk about their meaning, but if they must express our
own inner tragedy, they remain stiff and awkward. To have a spectral hand,
transparent like an immaterial reflection, nervous, tense as if in a final
spasm . . . ! Or, if not, then a heavy, threatening hand, cruel and hard! Hands
should tell us more than words or sighs, a smile or a prayer. The gift of
absolute expression, offspring of continuous transfiguration, will transform
us into a center of light more powerful than the sun itself if not only our
hands but also our face and everything else that is stamped with our
individuality will participate in it. The presence of some people means for
others overexcitement, lassitude, or illumination. Such people know neither
void nor discontinuity, but only the communion through which heights become
equally pleasurable and vertiginous.
I FEEL IN ME a strange restlessness, growing and dilating
like a regret, taking roots like sadness. Is it fear of my problematic future, or is it fear of my own
anxiety? I am overcome by anxiety about my own fatality. Could I go on living
with these obsessions? Is all of this life or an absurd dream? In me is wrought
the grotesque fantasy of a demon. The demonic character of this world is concentrated
in my anxiety—a mingling of regrets, twilight dreams, sadness, and unreality.
It will not be the perfume of flowers that I scatter on the earth, but smoke
and dust as after a great cataclysm!
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Burden of Sadness Is there another sadness besides
that of death? Definitely not, because true sadness is black, devoid of
charms, and dreamless. There is greater weariness in sadness than in
melancholy, and it drives one to disgust with life, to acute depression. The
difference between sadness and pain: the former is dominated by reflexivity while
the latter is weighed down by the fatal materiality of sensation. They both
lead only to death, never to love or erotic exaltation. Eros means unmediated living in the
secret necessity of life which—given the essential innocence of any erotic
experience— creates the illusion of liberty. To be sad or suffering, on the
other hand, means to be incapable of participating directly and organically in
the flux of life. Sadness as well as suffering reveals existence for us, for
only through them do we acquire consciousness of our separation from the
objective world, that anxiety which confers a tragic character upon our
existence.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Degradation
Through Work
Men generally work too much to be themselves. Work is
a curse which man has turned into pleasure. To work for work's sake, to enjoy a
fruitless endeavor, to imagine that you can fulfill yourself through assiduous
labor—all that is disgusting and incomprehensible. Permanent and uninterrupted
work dulls, trivializes, and depersonalizes. Work displaces man's center of
interest from the subjective to the objective realm of things. In consequence,
man no longer takes an interest in his own destiny but focuses on facts and
things. What should be an activity of permanent transfiguration becomes a
means of exteriorization, of abandoning one's inner self. In the modern world,
work signifies a purely external activity; man no longer makes himself through
it, he makes things. That each of us must have a career, must
enter upon a certain form of life which probably does not suit us, illustrates
work's tendency to dull the spirit. Man sees work as beneficial to his being,
but his fervor reveals his penchant for evil. In work, man forgets himself; yet
his forgetfulness is not simple and naive, but rather akin to stupidity.
Through work, man has moved from subject to object; in other words, he has
become a deficient animal who has betrayed his origins. Instead of living for himself— not selfishly but growing spiritually—man has
become the wretched, impotent slave of external reality. Where have they all
gone; ecstasy, vision, exaltation? Where is the supreme madness or the genuine
pleasure of evil? The negative pleasure one finds in work partakes of the
poverty and banality of daily life, its pettiness. Why not abandon this futile
work and begin anew without repeating the same wasteful mistake? Is subjective
consciousness of eternity not enough? It is the feeling for eternity
that the frenetic activity and trepidation of work has destroyed in us. Work
is the negation of eternity. The more goods we acquire in the temporal realm,
the more intense our external work, the less accessible and farther removed is
eternity. Hence the limited perspective of active and
energetic people, the banality of their thought and actions. I am not
contrasting work to either passive contemplation or vague dreaminess, but to
an unrealizable transfiguration; nevertheless, I prefer an intelligent and
observant laziness to intolerable, terrorizing activity. To awaken the modern
world, one must praise laziness. The lazy man has an infinitely keener
perception of metaphysical reality than the active one.
I AM LURED by faraway distances, the immense void I project
upon the world. A feeling of emptiness grows in me; it infiltrates my body like
a light and impalpable fluid. In its progress, like a
dilation into infinity, I perceive the mysterious presence of the most
contradictory feelings ever to inhabit a human soul. I am simultaneously happy
and unhappy, exalted and depressed, overcome by both pleasure and despair in
the most contradictory harmonies. I am so cheerful and yet so sad that my tears
reflect at once both heaven and earth. If only for the joy of my sadness, I
wish there were no death on this earth.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Sense of Endings
I can only speak about the sadness and the joy of the
end. I love only what reveals itself without reserve or compromise; you will
never find it anywhere but in the convulsions of heart-rending sadness, the
inebriation and excitement of last moments. Is not everything final? What is the
anxiety of nothingness if not the perverse joy of our final sadness, our
exalted love for the eternity of nothingness and the transience of existence?
Can it really be that for us existence means exile, and nothingness, home?
I must struggle against myself, fly into a rage at my
destiny, blow up all resistance to my transfiguration; let there be only my
desire for light and darkness! Let each one of my actions be either
triumph or fall, flight or failure! Let life grow and die in me with the
speed of a lightning bolt! Let not the pettiness and rationality of commonplace
existence spoil the pleasures and torments of my inner chaos, the tragic
delights of my final despair and joy!
To survive moments of extreme organic tension is not a
merit but a mark of imbecility. Survive, only to return to the banality of
existence? Survival is equally meaningless after the experience of nothingness
and after the paroxysm of sexual pleasure. I can't understand why people do not
commit suicide during orgasm, why they don't think survival commonplace and
vulgar. Such an intense though brief quiver should reduce us to ashes in
seconds. But if it does not kill us, we should kill ourselves. . . .There are
so many kinds of death. Yet no one has the courage or the originality to
attempt sexual suicide, a death no less absolute than the others but in which
the passage into nothingness is made from heights of pleasure. Why not take
this path? A flash of bitter lucidity in the forgetfulness of sexual pleasure would
suffice for sexual death no longer to appear as mere illusion.
When men can no longer bear the
monotony and the banality of ordinary existence, they will find in each
experience of the absolute an opportunity to commit suicide. The impossibility
of surviving such extraordinary states of exaltation will destroy existence. No
one will then doubt that it is possible to long for death after having listened
to certain symphonies or admired a unique landscape.
Animal banished from life,
man's condition is tragic, for he no longer finds fulfillment in life's simple
values. For animals, life is all there is; for man, life is a question mark. An
irreversible question mark, for man has never found, nor will ever find, any
answers. Life not only has no meaning; it can never
have one.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The
Satanic Principle of Suffering
If there are happy people on
this earth, why don't they come out and shout with joy, proclaim their
happiness in the streets? Why so much discretion and restraint? If I were exuding
permanent joy, serenity, and contentment, I would not hold it all inside me. I
would generously share it with others. I would let myself be swept away by the
buoyant energy that animates me.
If there is happiness, then it
must be shared and communicated. But maybe truly happy people are not aware of
their happiness. Then we could lend them some of our consciousness in exchange
for part of their infinite unconsciousness. Why is suffering all tears and
screams, and pleasure, all quivers? Were man as conscious of his pleasures as
he is of his pains, he would not have to redeem the former. Wouldn't the
distribution of joy and sorrow in the world be more equitable then?
If pain is not easily
forgotten, it is precisely because it occupies an important place in
consciousness. The only people who must forget a lot are those who have
suffered a lot. Normal people are the only ones with nothing to forget.
While pains have character,
pleasures vanish, melting away like forms with indistinct contours. It is hard
to remember pleasure and the circumstances surrounding it, while the memory of
pain is poignant and that of its circumstances makes it even more so. Pleasure
cannot be totally forgotten—the man of pleasure in his old age will be only
slightly disabused while the sufferer will, at best, arrive at bitter
resignation. To assert that pleasures are selfish and cut man off from life is
as shameful a prejudice as the one which asserts that pains bring us closer to
it. The frivolity of such prejudices is revolting. Their bookish origin indicts
all libraries and proves the value of real experience carried out to the end.
The Christian conception of
suffering as a path to love, if not its main gate, is fundamentally false. But
isn't Christianity mistaken on more than just this point? To speak of
suffering as the path to love means to know nothing of suffering's satanic essence.
You don't climb up the steps of suffering; you climb down. They do not lead to
heaven but to hell. The darkness at the bottom of the ladder of suffering is
less eternal or infinite than the blinding light at the top of the ladder of
joy.
Suffering separates and
dissociates; like a centrifugal force it pulls you away from the center of
life, the hub of the universe where all things tend toward unity. The divine
principle distinguishes itself by an effort toward cosmic synthesis and
participation in the essence of everything. The satanic principle, on the
other hand, is a principle of dislocation and duality which characterizes all
suffering.
Through joy, spiritual or
sensual, you naively partake of life; unconsciously you join in the dynamism of
existence, each particle of your body vibrating with the irrational pulsations
of the Whole.
Disjunction
from the world through suffering leads to excessive interiorization
and, paradoxically, to such a high level of consciousness that the world, with
all its splendors and glooms, becomes exterior and transcendent. Thus deeply sundered from the
world, so irredeemably lonely, how can we forget anything? We want to forget
only what made us suffer. However, through some cruel and paradoxical twist,
memories vanish when we want to remember but fix themselves
permanently in the mind when we want to forget.
Men generally belong to two
categories: those for whom the world offers opportunities for interiorization and those for whom the world remains
external and objective. For true interioriza- tion, objective existence is only a pretext. Only as such can it have any meaning at all, because
an objective teleology cannot be elaborated and justified without a number of
illusions, whose main defect is that they can easily
be detected by a penetrating eye. All men see fires, storms, explosions, or
landscapes; but how many feel the flames, the lightnings,
the whirlwinds, or the harmony? How many have an inner beauty that tinges
their melancholy? For the indifferent, to whom nature offers an insipid and
cold objectivity, life even when fully enjoyed is a sum of missed
opportunities.
However painful my agony, however great my isolation,
the distance separating me from the world does nothing but render it more
accessible. Although I cannot find in it either objective meaning or
transcendental finality, existence, with its multiplicity of forms, has never
ceased to be a source of both delight and sadness. At times, the beauty of a
flower is enough to justify in my eyes the principle of universal finality
while at others, the smallest cloud troubling the
serenity of the sky rekindles my somber pessimism. Those who interiorize
excessively discover symbolic meanings in the most insignificant aspects of
nature.
Is it possible that I carry within me all that I've
seen in my life? It is frightening to think that all those landscapes, books,
horrors, and sublimities could be amassed in one single brain. I feel as if
they have been transferred into me as realities and that they
weigh heavily upon me. Sometimes I am overcome and I would prefer to forget
all. Interiorization leads to inner collapse, because
the world penetrates you and crushes you with its overbearing
weight. Is it surprising, then, that some would have recourse to anything—from
vulgarity to art—in order to forget?
I have NO ideas, only obsessions. Anybody can have
ideas. Ideas have never caused anybody's downfall.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
An
Indirect Animal
All
men have the same defect: they wait
to live, for they have not the courage of each instant. Why not invest enough
passion in each moment to make it an eternity? We all learn to live only when
we no longer have anything to expect, because we do not live in the living
present but in a vague and distant future. We should not wait for anything
except the immediate promptings of the moment. We should wait without the consciousness of time. There's no
salvation without the immediate. But man is a being who no longer knows the
immediate. He is an indirect animal.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Impossible
Truth
When should our happiness begin? When we have
persuaded ourselves that there is no truth. All salvation comes thenceforth,
even salvation through nothing. He who does not believe in the impossibility of
truth, or does not rejoice in it, has only one road to salvation, which he
will, however, never find.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Subjectivity
For those deprived of faith, an
excess of subjectivity leads either to megalomania or self-denigration, to too
much love or too much self-hatred. Either way, you spend yourself ahead of
time. Subjectivity makes you either God or Satan.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Homo
Man should stop being—or becoming—a rational animal.
He should become a lunatic, risking everything for the sake of his dangerous
fantasies, capable of exaltations, ready to die for
all that the world has as well as for what it has not. Each man's ideal should
be to stop being a man. This can only be attained through absolute
arbitrariness.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Love
in Brief
Love of mankind springing from
suffering resembles wisdom sprung from misfortune. In both cases, the roots are
rotten and the sources poisoned. Only spontaneous love flowing with sincere
generosity and self-abnegation can fertilize the soul of others. Love born in
suffering hides too many tears and sighs not to have its rays stained by a bitter clarity. There is too much torment,
renunciation, and anxiety in this love for it to be anything but infinite
forbearance. You forgive everything, you accept everything, you
justify everything. But is this still love? How can one love when one is
removed from everything? This kind of love reveals the void of a soul suspended
between all and nothing just as becoming a Don Juan is the only remedy for a
broken heart. As for Christianity, it knows no love: it only knows forbearance
or compassion, allusions to love rather than love itself.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Nothing
Matters
Everything is possible, and yet
nothing is. All is permitted, and yet again, nothing. No matter which way we
go, it is no better than any other. It is all the same whether you achieve
something or not, have faith or not, just as it is all the same whether you cry
or remain silent. There is an explanation for everything, and yet there is
none. Everything is both real and unreal, normal and
absurd, splendid and insipid. There is nothing worth more than anything else, nor any idea better than any other. Why grow sad from one's
sadness and delight in one's joy? What does it matter whether our tears come
from pleasure or pain? Love your unhappiness and hate your happiness, mix
everything up, scramble it all! Be a snowflake dancing in the air, a flower floating downstream! Have courage when you don't need to,
and be a coward when you must be brave! Who knows? You may still be a winner!
And if you lose, does it really matter? Is there anything to win in this world?
All gain is a loss, and all loss is a gain. Why always expect a definite
stance, clear ideas, meaningful words? I feel as if I
should spout fire in response to all the questions which were ever put, or not
put, to me.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Sources of Evil
How can we fight unhappiness? By struggling with
ourselves, for unhappiness comes from within, not from without. If we could
constantly remind ourselves that everything is nothing but a reflection in our
consciousness, more or less sharp, depending on the acuity of our senses, we
could then attain a state of lucidity in which reality would resume its true
proportions. We cannot aspire to happiness, only to less unhappiness.
To live in despair is a mark of great endurance,
whereas to grow dull and stupid after a great unhappiness is a mark of
deficiency. Self-control and sustained inner effort are required in order to
diminish unhappiness. All efforts to attain happiness, on the other hand, are
entirely futile. You cannot retrace your steps once you've taken the path to
unhappiness; it is the path of no return. From being happy, one can become
unhappy, so there are more unpleasant surprises in happiness than in unhappiness.
The world seems right to us when we are happy; when unhappy, we wish the world
were anything but what it is. Though fully aware that the source of unhappiness
is in us, we nevertheless turn a personal defect into a metaphysical deficiency.
Unhappiness will never be sufficiently generous to
acknowledge its own darkness in the world. Substituting for our subjective
plight an objective one, we hope to lighten our burden and avoid the reproaches
which we should in fact address to ourselves. But such objectification
actually deepens our unhappiness and, presenting it as cosmic fatality, shuts off any
possibility of lessening it or of making it more bearable.
The
discipline of unhappiness causes less anxiety and fewer painful surprises; it
abates agony and confines suffering. It is a disguise for an inner drama, the
discreet mask of agony.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Beauty's Magic Tricks
Man's sensitivity to beauty
grows as he gets closer to happiness. In beauty, all things find their justification,
their raison d'etre. We conceive a beautiful thing
such as it is. A painting or a landscape delights us to such an extent that we can not imagine them in any other way but what they are. To
place the world under the sign of beauty is to assert that it is as it should
be. Then all is glorious harmony, and even the negative aspects of existence do
nothing but increase its glory and its charm. Beauty will not bring us salvation,
but it will bring us closer to happiness. In a world of antinomies, can beauty
be spared? Its specific nature and attraction lie in the fact that it is paradoxical only from an objective point of view. The
esthetic expresses this paradox: to represent the
absolute through form, to give infinity objective, finite shape. The
absolute- in-the-form, that is, embodied in limited
expressions, reveals itself only to him who is overcome by esthetic
emotion; from any other point of view it is a contradictio in adjecto. For this reason, there is an
incalculable amount of illusion in any ideal of beauty. But even worse is the
fact that the fundamental premise of any ideal beauty—that the world is the way
it should be—does not hold up under investigation. The world could be any way
except the way it is.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Man’s Inconsistency
Why do men insist on achieving
something? Would it not be better if they stood still under the sun in calm and
silent immobility? What is there to accomplish? Why so much effort and
ambition? Man has forgotten the meaning of silence. Although consciousness is
the offspring of a vital deficiency, it is not a cause for inadaptability in
every individual; in some it has, on the contrary, produced an exacerbation of
their vital instincts. Unable to live in the present, man amasses things which
weigh and subjugate him; the feeling of the future is a calamity to him.
Consciousness has divided men into two categories, equally unbalanced and
unhappy: those bent on interiorization, self-torment,
and tragedy, and those possessed by the imperialistic urger
to acquire and to own. Consciousness made animal, man, and man,
demon, but it has never made anyone God,
no matter how proud the world is to have killed one on the cross.
Shun men impervious to vice,
for their insipidity is tiresome. For what would their conversation be about if
not morality? Whoever has not ventured beyond morality has not fully explored
life's opportunities and has never transfigured his sins. Genuine existence
begins where morality ends; only after that can it experiment with everything,
risk everything, even if obstacles block the road to achievement. Only through
innumerable transfigurations can one reach the region where all is permitted,
where the soul can fling itself without remorse into vulgarity, sublimity, or
grotesqueness to such an extent that no direction or form of life remains
unexplored. The tyranny governing ordinary existence vanishes and is replaced
by the absolute spontaneity of unique existence, which carries its own law in
itself. Could morality still serve such a being—probably the most generous
because also the most absurd, capable of renouncing the whole world, and consequently giving away all that can be given?
Generosity is incompatible with morality, that rationalization of customs,
that mechanization of life. Any generous act is absurd, a renunciation unheard
of in the ordinary man, who drapes himself in morality in order to hide his
vulgar nullity. All that is truly moral begins when we have done with morality.
The pettiness of its laws is never more evident than in its condemnation of
vice, the expression of carnal tragedy born from the presence of the spirit in
the flesh. Vice is the tragedy of the flesh, the flesh bursting out of its own
fatality, attempting to break the shackles imprisoning its passionate impulses. An organic weariness drives the nerves and the
flesh to a despair that only an exploration of all forms of pleasure can
alleviate. In vice, the attraction of the abnormal creates a troubling anxiety:
the spirit seems to have become blood and stirs in the flesh like an immanent
force. Exploration of the possible cannot take place without the participation
of the spirit. Vice is the triumph of the individual; how could flesh represent
the individual without outside intervention? The mingling of flesh and spirit,
blood and consciousness, creates an extremely rich effervescence for the man
ensnared by vice. Nothing is worse than vice which is learned, aped, or
borrowed; thus a rational extenuation of vice is unjustified: at best, one
must single out its fecundity for those who know how to transfigure it, who can deviate its deviation. To practice it in criminal
and vulgar ways is to exploit its scandalous materiality and ignore the
immaterial frisson which constitutes its excellence. To attain certain heights,
intimacy cannot dispense with the anxieties of vice. No man of vice can be
condemned unless he ceases to look upon vice as a pretext and turns it into a
goal.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Capitulation
How does one
become a pessimist? An organic fatality, rising from deep inner turmoil and
without any external stimulus, causes incessant depressions which stifle the elan, attacking life at its roots. It is wrong to surmise
that a pessimist has an organic deficiency or weak vital instincts. In fact,
none but those who love life passionately, though maybe unconsciously,
become pessimists. The devitalizing process takes place later, as a consequence
of depressions, for only in passionate, visionary men
do depressions have such capacity for erosion that they devour life as waves
swallow up the shore. In the weak man, depressions cause neither
tension, crises, nor excess; they lead to apathy and slow death. The
pessimist represents an organic paradox whose insurmountable contradictions
generate an intense effervescence. Is not this combination of frequent
depressions with equally frequent elans a paradoxical
situation? It goes without saying that depressions weaken and exhaust vitality,
for depressions are assaults on life. There is no efficient way to fight them:
they can subside temporarily through intense work and amusements. Only one
endowed with restless vitality is susceptible to pessimism. You become a
pessimist—a demonic, elemental, bestial pessimist—only when life has been
defeated many times in its fight against depression. Then destiny emerges in
man's consciousness as a form of the irreparable.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Facing Silence
Once you have come to set great
store by silence, you have hit upon a fundamental expression of life in the
margins. The reverence for silence of great solitaries and founders of
religions has far deeper roots than we think. Men's presence must have been unendurable
and their complex problems disgusting for one not to care about anything except
silence.
Chronic fatigue predisposes to
a love of silence, for in it words lose their meaning and strike the ear with
the hollow sonority of mechanical hammers; concepts weaken, expressions lose
their force, the word grows barren as the wilderness. The ebb and flow of the
outside is like a distant monotonous murmur unable to stir interest or
curiosity. Then you will think it useless to express an opinion, to take a
stand, to make an impression; the noises you have renounced increase the
anxiety of your soul. After having struggled madly to solve all problems, after
having suffered on the heights of despair, in the supreme hour of revelation,
you will find that the only answer, the only reality, is silence.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
The Double and His Art
One does not learn the art of psychology, one lives and experiences it, for no science
will give you the key to the mysteries of the soul. One cannot become a good
psychologist without turning oneself into an object of study, evincing daily
interest in the complexity of one's own case. To be initiated into the
mysteries of the Other, you must first be initiated
into your own. In order to be a psychologist, you must be sufficiently unhappy
to understand happiness, so refined that you could become a barbarian at any
moment, and so intensely desperate that you do not know whether you live in a
desert or in the midst of a fire. Protean, equally centripetal and centrifugal,
your ecstasy will have to be esthetic, sexual, religious, and perverse.
Fine psychological
understanding is the product of a life of self-contemplation, a life which sees
itself in other lives as if in so many mirrors; for a psychologist, all men are
fragments of himself. The psychologist's contempt for others contains a grain
of secret and unlimited self-irony. No one practices psychology out of love:
it is rather a form of sadism, a desire to annihilate the other by taking
possession of his intimate being, by stripping him of his mysterious aura.
Quickly exhausting men and their limited resources, the psychologist is easily
bored, for he is not naive enough to have friends and is too self-conscious to
have lovers. Skepticism is not the beginning but the natural end of
psychology. It is nature's punishment for this violator of mysteries, this
supremely indiscreet person who, having invested too few illusions in
knowledge, ends in disillusion.
A little knowledge is
delightful; a lot, disgusting. The more you know, the less you want to know. He
who has not suffered from knowledge has never known anything.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
Nonsense
When the ticking
of a watch breaks the silence of eternity, arousing you out of serene
contemplation, how can you help resenting the absurdity of time, its march into
the future, and all the nonsense about evolution and progress? Why go forward,
why live in time? The sudden revelation of time at such moments, conferring
upon it a crushing preeminence otherwise nonexistent, is the fruit of a strong
contempt for life, an unwillingness to go on. If this revelation happens at
night, the sensation of unutterable loneliness is added to the absurdity of
time, because then, far from the crowd, you face time alone, the two of you
caught in an irreducible duality. Time, in this nocturnal desolation, is no
longer populated with actions and objects: it becomes an evergrowing nothingness, a dilating void, a threat
from beyond. Silence resounds then with the mournful clamor of bells knelling
for a dead universe. Only he who has separated time from existence lives this
drama: fleeing the latter, he is crushed by the former. And he feels how time,
like death, gains ground.
Unknown
@page { margin-bottom: 5.000000pt; margin-top: 5.000000pt; }
@font-face {
font-family: "Arial Narrow"
}
@font-face {
font-family: "Trebuchet MS"
}
@font-face {
font-family: David
}
E. M. Cioran:
A Short Chronology
1911  E. M. Cioran is born April 8 in Rasinari,
near the city of Sibiu in Southern Transylvania, then still part of the
Austro-Hungarian empire. His father is a Romanian
Orthodox priest.
1920-28  He attends high
school in Sibiu.
1929-31  He studies
philosophy at the University of Bucharest, where he writes a thesis on Henri
Bergson.
1934  On the Heights of Despair, his first book, is published in Bucharest by the King
Carol II Foundation for Art and Literature. It is awarded the foundation's
prestigious prize for young authors.
1936   He earns his Teaching
Certificate in philosophy. Cartea amagirilor (The Book of Delusions).
1937   Schimbarea lafa^aaRomaniei (Romania’s Transfiguration). He wins a fellowship from the
French Institute in Bucharest and leaves for Paris, where he has lived ever
since, as a stateless person, a status he calls "most appropiate
for an intellectual." Lacrimi §i Sfinp (Tears and Saints),
his last Romanian work, appears in Bucharest after his departure.
1937-49  Living
in Paris like a perennial student, he applies for grants, lives in cheap hotel
rooms, and eats in university cafeterias.
1947  He submits to the Gallimard publishing house the
manuscript of his first French book, Precis de decomposition.
It is accepted, but he retrieves it and rewrites it entirely four times.
Writing in French was "the most difficult task of my life," something
akin to putting on a "straitjacket."
1949  Precis de decomposition is published.
1949-90  He lives modestly in
Paris, working part time as translator and manuscript reader, and continues his
writing. He describes his life in the following words: "I don't make a
living, I eke one out. I don't wish to be well off."
PRINCIPAL
WORKS IN FRENCH
Syllogismes de I'amertume, Gallimard, 1952 La tentation
d'exister, Gallimard,
1956
Histoire et utopie, Gallimard, 1960, winner of the
Prix Combat
La chute dans le temps, Gallimard, 1964
La mauvais demiurge, Gallimard, 1969
Valeryface a ses
idoles, L'Herne,
1970
De l'inconvenient d'etre
ne, Gallimard, 1973
Exercises d'admiration, Gallimard, 1986